WEDNESDAY,
SEPTEMBER 18TH, TWENTY TWENTY
FOUR CHARNOCK MEETING OF THE NO
TRANSPORTATION COMMISSION THIS
MEETING IS BEING HELD
ELECTRONICALLY BUT WE INTEND TO
CONDUCT SIMILARLY TO AN
IN-PERSON MEETING PUBLIC
COMMENT WILL BE VIA TELEPHONE
OR ZOOME ONLY TO SPEAK DURING
ANY OF THE PUBLIC COMMENT
OPPORTUNITIES PLEASE CALL TO
ZERO SIX THREE THREE SEVEN NINE
SEVEN TWO THREE AN INTERMEETING
ID NUMBER NINE THREE FOUR SIX
THREE EIGHT FIVE TWO NINE ZERO
SEVEN OR JOIN VIA THE ZOOM LIKE
THIS INFORMATION IS ALSO
AVAILABLE ON THE PUBLISHED
AGENDA IN THE PUBLIC NOTICES
SECTION OF THE CITY WEBSITE AND
ON THE BROADCAST OF THIS
MEETING ON TTN CHANNEL 16.
CHRIS, IF YOU COULD PLEASE CALL
.
I HAVE RECEIVED FROM LEGAL AND
WHICH MAY NOT BE ABLE TO ATTEND
THIS EVENING'S BIXIGA AND FROM
WHERE YOUR NAME IS THAT YOUR
NAME IS CALLED COUNCIL MEMBER
BRIGS
COMMISSION AND YOU'RE
FROM ROBERT HERE FROM ANN
ARBOR, MICHIGAN HERE FROM ANN
ARBOR, MICHIGAN.
HERE FROM ANN ARBOR, MICHIGAN.
FROM THEN ARBOR, MICHIGAN LEAD
IS COMMISSIONER CARPENTER HERE
FROM SUPERIOR TOWNSHIP,
MICHIGAN SWARMY IF I'M IN ANN
ARBOR CONVENTIONEER HUTCHINSON,
YOUR FROM ANN ARBOR, MICHIGAN
COMMISSIONER HERE FROM
NORTHVILLE TOWNSHIP
COMMISSIONER POLICE YOU MAKE
SURE HERE FROM TYRONE TOWNSHIP
COMMISSIONERS, OK?
AND WITH THAT WE THANK YOU.
THERE ARE TWO ITEMS ON THE
INCENTS AGENDA APPROVAL OF THE
AGENDA AND APPROVAL OF THE
MINUTES FROM AUGUST.
ARE THERE ANY OTHER
MODIFICATIONS TO THE COUNCIL'S
AGENDA SEEING THEM AS A MOTION
TO APPROVE THE CONSENT AGENDA
AS PRESENTED TO BRUCE BY LARRY
SECONDED BY ANYONE ANYONE LIKE.
ALL RIGHT.
THANK YOU.
>> BY MAKING OTHERS IN FAVOR
OF THE MOTION, PLEASE SAY YES
OR RAISE YOUR HAND.
YES ALL AS OPPOSED TO THE
MOTION PLEASE SAY NO OR RAISE
YOUR HAND ITSELF TO GENDA IS
APPROVED.
NEXT UP IS THE PUBLIC COMMENTS
SECTION.
THIS IS AN OPPORTUNITY FOR
PERSONS TO SPEAK FOR UP TO
THREE MINUTES AGAIN PLEASE CALL
TO ZERO SIX THREE THREE SEVEN
NINE SEVEN TWO THREE AND ENTER
READING IT NUMBER NINE THREE
FOUR SIX THREE FIVE TWO NINE
ZERO SEVEN OR CONNECT WITH YOU
AS DESCRIBED ON THE AGENDA,
CITY STAFF WILL SELECT CALLERS
THAT HAVE RAISED THEIR HAND ONE
BY ONE USING THE LAST THREE
DIGITS OF YOUR PHONE NUMBER OR
THE PERSONS IN MIND IN ORDER TO
ELECTRONICALLY RAISE YOUR HAND
INDICATE YOUR DESIRE TO SPEAK
PLEASE PRESS STAR NINE ON YOUR
PHONE OR THE RAISED HAND BUTTON
AND ZOOM HEAR AN AUTOMATED
ANNOUNCEMENT THAT THE HOST IS
ALLOWING YOU TO SPEAK WHEN
SPEAKING.
PLEASE MOVE TO A QUIET AREA AND
ANY TELEVISION BACKGROUND
SOUNDS THAT WE MAY HEAR YOU ONE
CLEARLY.
>> DO WE HAVE ANY MEMBERS
OF THE PUBLIC WHO WISH TO SPEAK
?
YES WE DO.
WE HAVE A NUMBER ENDING IN
THREE TO SIX.
I WILL GIVE YOU A THIRTY MINUTE
HEADS UP BEFORE THE THREE
MINUTES ARE UP.
YOU ARE NOW SPEAKER
JEFF
CROCKETT.
CAN YOU HEAR ME?
YES, THANK YOU.
>> I AM A 50 YEAR ANN ARBOR
RESIDENT WHO LIVES DOWNTOWN.
I DID SPEAK LAST MONTH BUT AT
THAT POINT YOU DIDN'T HAVE THE
INFORMATION OF THE EMAIL.
I BELIEVE YOU HAVE THOSE NOW IN
YOUR PACKET.
I HOPE YOU TAKE A LOOK
BASICALLY AND EXPRESS THE
NEWS CONCERNS ABOUT PEDESTRIAN
SAFETY AND ABOUT REGULATIONS
FUSION AMONG PEDESTRIANS,
BIKERS, SCOOTER OPERATORS,
DRIVERS I SEE IN YOUR AT THIS
TIME THERE ARE SIMILAR CONCERNS
EXPRESSED BY THE RESIDENTS AND
INFORMAL CONVERSATIONS I'VE HAD
WITH PEOPLE IN MY PERSONAL
NETWORK.
IT IS CLEAR THAT MANY PEOPLE IN
ANN ARBOR SHARE SIMILAR
CONCERNS IN THE WAKE OF THE
INSTALLATION OF MANY MILES
OF BIKE LANES IN A RECENT NEXT
DOOR POST, FOR EXAMPLE, WE HAD
TWO HUNDRED THIRTY PEOPLE
EXPRESSING VARYING DEGREES A
CONCERT COINCIDENTALLY I
RECENTLY ENCOUNTERED A POLICE
OFFICER TAKING A BIKE ON
DIVISION NEAR AND THAT HAD BEEN
BANNED.
SO I HAD A LONG TALK WITH THEM
AND I DESCRIBED MY CONCERNS
ABOUT PEDESTRIAN SAFETY AND
RIGHT AWAY CONFUSION AND HE
AGREED.
HE SAID THAT THE POLICE
DEPARTMENT HAS RECEIVED
NUMEROUS COMPLAINTS.
WHAT THE PUBLIC LACKS THOUGH IS
DATA AND THEREFORE I'M HOPING
TO TRANSPORTATION COMMISSION
WILL ASK THE POLICE DEPARTMENT
FOR STATISTICS ABOUT
TRANSPORTATION VIOLATIONS
INVOLVING BICYCLES, USERS AND
DRIVERS.
NOW YOU DO HAVE BIKING SAFETY
GUIDELINES ON YOUR WEBSITE AND
BASICALLY WHAT THEY SAY AND YOU
ALSO HAVE A ENFORCEMENT
REGULATIONS BUT BASICALLY THEY
SAY THAT BIKERS SHOULD USE THE
PEDESTRIAN IF YOU RIDE ON THE
SIDEWALK, SOLELY ANNOUNCE YOUR
PRESENCE TO PEDESTRIANS, WATCH
YOUR BIKE AND CROWDED
SIDEWALKS.
THE PEDESTRIANS STOP DISMOUNT
BEFORE ENTERING CROSSWALKS.
WATCH FOR DRIVERS WHO MAYBE NOT
WATCHING FOR YOU AND AND OTHERS
IT HAS BEEN MY EXPERIENCE
THOUGH THAT THESE GUIDELINES
ARE ROUTINELY IGNORED AND SEEN
THIS TIME AND TIME AGAIN IT'S
VERY COMMON TO SEE BICYCLE SORT
OF ZOOM THROUGH STOP SIGNS
WITHOUT STOPPING AT ALSO
ZOOMING DOWN SIDEWALKS WITHOUT
SLOWING DOWN OR ANNOUNCING
THEIR PRESENCE.
SO BASICALLY I HOPE THAT THE
TRANSPORTATION COMMISSION WILL
PUBLICLY ACKNOWLEDGE THE
PEDESTRIAN SAFETY IS A PROBLEM
AND I SUGGEST SOME SOLUTIONS.
ONE IS TO CREATE AN ONLINE
SURVEY DOCUMENTING CITIZEN
CONCERNS ALL PUBLIC FORUMS
PROVIDE RIGHT OF WAY GUIDELINES
BECAUSE THERE IS A LOT
OF CONFUSION ABOUT THE
INTERACTION BETWEEN BIKE LANES
AND DRIVERS.
CREATE A YOUTUBE VIDEO ABOUT
BIKE SAFETY BECAUSE VERY FEW
PEOPLE GO ON THE WEBSITE TO
LOOK IN DETAIL IN DEPTH IN
TERMS OF REGULAR TO TRY TO USE
PUBLICLY AVAILABLE CREATE A
SINGLE PAGE BIKE SAFETY
EXCLUDER FLIER TO MAKE IT MUCH
MORE ACCESSIBLE AND POSTED ON
THE TRANSPORTATION WEBSITE.
VERY IMPORTANTLY ENGAGE IN
MICHIGAN TO PROVIDE BIKING
SCOOTER GUIDELINES FOR
STUDENTS.
MEET WITH THE ANN ARBOR POLICE
TO SEE WHAT CAN BE DONE TO
IMPROVE ENFORCING ENFORCEMENT
OF THE BIKING ORDINANCE AND USE
SAFE STREET GRANT FUNDING TO
DEPLOY MORE POLICE IN DOWNTOWN
ANN ARBOR FOR THEM TO SORT
OF WATCH TO ENFORCE BIKING AND
SCOOTER ORDINANCE REGULATION.
IN CONCLUSION, I DO NOT BELIEVE
THE CONSULTING ONLY WITH
TRANSPORTATION EXPERTS IS GOING
TO CAPTURE WHAT IS ACTUALLY
HAPPENING ON SIDEWALKS BIKE
LANES.
PUBLIC INPUT IS CRITICAL TO
BOTH ACKNOWLEDGING PROBLEMS
EXIST AND DEVELOPING REALISTIC
AND PRACTICAL SOLUTIONS.
>> THANK YOU VERY MUCH FOR YOUR
CONSIDERATION.
THANK YOU
.
OK, CITY COUNCIL MEMBER RACHEL
,GOOD EVENING.
GOOD.
>> I HAVE A FEW QUICK ITEMS.
THE FIRST ONE IS THAT VISION
ZERO IS BASED ON CONTINUOUS
QUALITY IMPROVE MOVEMENT
METHODOLOGY.
THAT SAID IT HAS TO BE DATA
DRIVEN DECISION MAKING.
IT IS NOT BASED ON A CYCLE
OF FIVE YEAR PLANS AND WE HAVE
TO DO CRASH ANALYSIS AND WE
HAVE TO MAKE IMPROVEMENTS TO
THOSE AREAS AS WELL AS SIMILAR
AREAS.
IF A CRASH OCCURS AND YOU'RE TO
BACK THAT UP THE 60S OF VISION
ZERO INCLUDE EVALUATION THE
CITY DOES NOT HAVE THE OPTION
TO SIMPLY IGNORE THAT AS THEY
HAVE DONE
NO TWO LINE OF SIGHT
IS CRITICAL.
THE CITY IS NOW ALLOWING
BUILDINGS.
IN FACT THEY'RE REQUIRING
BUILDINGS WITHIN THE SITE.
DISTIN TRIANGLE THIS IS IS AN
ENGINEERING VIOLATION AGAIN IT
IS NOT OPTIONAL.
WE MUST FOLLOW LINE OF SIGHT
AND SIGHT DISTANCE REGULATIONS
NUMBER THREE AT LEAST TWO TO
THREE TIMES A WEEK SOMEONE
APPROACHES ME ABOUT AN UNSAFE
CONDITION.
THE MAJORITY OF THOSE ARE DUE
TO LINE OF SIGHT.
SOMETIMES I PUT THOSE IN SEAT
QUICK FIX.
SOMETIMES I RECOMMEND THAT THE
OTHER PERSON DOES.
WE NEED A FEEDBACK LOOP FOR
THIS JUST AS JEFF CROCKETT'S
MENTIONED.
AND LASTLY, OUR NEIGHBORHOODS
ARE SUFFERING AND THAT INCLUDES
OUR SCHOOL WALK ZONES AS WELL
AS THE CAMPUS NEIGHBORHOOD.
WE DO NOT HAVE GOOD LINE
OF SIGHT.
WE DO NOT HAVE GOOD CROSSWALKS
IN TERMS OF VEGETATION CLEARING
NEAR MY HOUSE A BUS STOP WAS
MOVED TO THE WEST SIDE OF GREEN
ROAD.
THERE IS NO CROSSWALK AND THE
CITY HAS NOT ACTED ON THAT
REQUEST.
WE WE HAVE TO HAVE CROSSWALKS
WHERE THERE ARE SCHOOL BUS
STOPS AND CHILDREN CROSSING THE
STREET AND TO JUST WAIT UNTIL
THE NEXT FIVE YEAR PLAN
OF MOVING TOGETHER IS NOT
ACCEPTABLE, WE NEED TO BECOME
MUCH MORE AGILE.
>> THANK YOU BY THANK YOU.
OK, YOU CAN BE YOU HAVE THREE
MINUTES
.
I'M AFRAID THAT PERSON MAY NOT
HAVE HEARD YOU AND YOU SAY THAT
AGAIN.
NO I HEARD YOU.
IT LOOKS LIKE YOU PROMOTED ME
TO A PANELIST.
I'M NOT SURE IF YOU MEANT TO DO
THAT.
I CAN JUST GIVE MY COMMENT AND
THEN AND THEN LEAVE THE
PANELIST THING.
ALL RIGHT.
SO HELLO THIS IS ADAM DESKOVIC
CALLING FROM LAS VEGAS DRIVE IN
THE FOURTH WARD.
THERE'S A FEW THINGS I'D LIKE
TO ADDRESS TODAY.
FIRST I'D JUST LIKE TO BRING UP
A FEW DANGEROUS SITUATIONS.
I'VE NOTICED MORE AND MORE
RECENTLY ALL OF THEM ARE
FAILURE TO YIELD SCENARIOS I
SEE FREQUENTLY WENT OUT FOR A
WALK AND I'VE SEEN PEOPLE IN
THE COMMUNITY COMPLAINING ABOUT
SIMILAR SITUATIONS.
THESE ARE NOT LINE OF SIGHT
ISSUES.
THEY'RE DUE TO DRIVERS SIMPLY
NOT FOLLOWING THE RULES OF THE
ROAD.
THE FIRST IS A FAILURE TO STOP
AT STOP SIGNS WHEN TURNING FROM
A SIDE STREET ONTO A LARGE
STREET SUCH AS WEST CITY AND OR
WEST LIBERTY OR CROSS TRAFFIC
DOES NOT STOP PEOPLE PULLING
OUT OR LOOKING TO THE LEFT FOR
AN OPENING IN TRAFFIC AND
THEY'RE BLOWING RIGHT THROUGH
THE STOP BAR AND CROSSWALK.
I'M NOT TALKING ABOUT A ROLLING
STOP EITHER THAT INVOLVES AT
LEAST SLOWING DOWN ENOUGH TO
LOOK BOTH WAYS.
THE NEXT IS A SIMILAR SITUATION
WITH RIGHT TURN ON RED RATHER
THAN STOP, LOOK AND PROCEED.
DRIVERS ARE LOOKING TO THEIR
LEFT AND ROLLING RIGHT THROUGH
THE CROSSWALK WITHOUT SLOWING
DOWN.
FINALLY WHEN I SEE QUITE OFTEN
AS SEVERAL PEOPLE RUNNING A RED
LIGHT TO TRY TO MAKE A LEFT
TURN BEFORE ONCOMING TRAFFIC
GETS AGREE THIS IS A PROBLEM
BECAUSE THEY'RE DOING THIS
DURING THE LEADING PEDESTRIAN
INTERPOL.
NEEDLESS TO SAY IT COULD BE
QUITE DANGEROUS.
SOMEBODY STARTED TO CROSS AT
THAT POINT I'M NOT SURE HOW WE
CAN BEST ADDRESS THIS SO I HOPE
YOU CAN FIND A WAY.
I THINK NEAR MISSES AND
DANGEROUS BEHAVIOR ARE THINGS
WE SHOULD REALLY BE LOOKING AT
.
>> THESE INDICATE LIKELIHOOD
OF CRASHES AND INJURIES DOWN
THE LINE NEXT I'D LIKE TO
ADDRESS THE VISION ZERO
PROGRESS REPORT.
ONE THING I FIND A LITTLE
DISCOURAGING IS IT APPEARS TO
DOWNPLAY THE IMPORTANCE
OF ENGINEERING APPROACHES IN
FAVOR OF ENFORCEMENT AND
EDUCATION WHILE THOSE ARE
IMPORTANT PARTS OF MISSION
ZERO, I THINK WE ARE NOT GOING
TO MEET OUR GOALS IF WE DO NOT
EMPHASIZE THE NECESSARY CHANGES
WHO ARE BUILT ENVIRONMENT TO
IMPROVE SAFETY.
ON THAT NOTE I WOULD LIKE TO
ADDRESS SOME OF THE EMAILS
YOU'VE RECEIVED AND DISCUSSIONS
I'VE SEEN IN THE COMMUNITY AND
COMMENTS TO THIS COMMISSION.
THERE'S A VOCAL MINORITY THAT
SEEMS TO BE AGAINST MANY OF THE
CHANGES THAT YOU ARE
IMPLEMENTING IN ORDER TO
IMPROVE SAFETY ON CYCLISTS AND
OTHER VULNERABLE ROAD USERS
CONSULTING WITH TRANSPORTATION
EXPERTS AND THESE CHANGES IS
ABSOLUTELY ESSENTIAL.
I JUST WANT TO MAKE SURE THAT
THE TRANSPORTATION COMMISSION
KNOWS THAT ALL OF YOUR EFFORTS
ARE APPRECIATED IN THE WORK
YOU'RE DOING TO MAKE ALL OF US
SAFER IS IMPORTANT AND
ABSOLUTELY WELCOME.
THANK YOU FOR YOUR TIME.
THANK YOU
.
OK,
HI THIS IS ADAM GOODMAN
SPEAKING TO YOU FROM THE FIFTH
WARD ON YOUR AGENDA.
THERE IS AN EMAIL FROM ME ABOUT
A PROJECT THAT I ACTUALLY TRIED
TO SEND IN ADVANCE OF LAST
MONTH'S MEETING BUT I GUESS IT
DIDN'T MAKE IT ONTO THE AGENDA
UNTIL THIS MONTH AND ALSO THE
PDF EXPORT GOT MESSED UP
SOMEHOW SO THE IMAGES THE
DIAGRAMS I INCLUDED ARE NOT
REALLY READABLE.
I POSTED A COPY OF THIS ON
TWITTER EARLIER TODAY THAT'S
CORRECTLY FORMATTED IF ANY
OF YOU WOULD LIKE TO GO FIND
THAT BUT REALLY YOU KNOW, I
WANT TO CLARIFY A BIT THAT I I
DON'T THINK IT'S ACTUALLY WORTH
THE TIME AND EFFORT AND
OPPORTUNITY COSTS TO GO BACK
AND REDESIGN PAULENE IN ORDER
TO GET A TOTAL OF LIKE THREE
BLOCKS OF PARKING PROTECTED
BIKE LANES.
THIS IS WHAT I WROTE SHOULD
INSTEAD BE READ AS AN
EXPRESSION OF GENERAL
FRUSTRATION THAT OUR CITY
REMAINS 10 YEARS BEHIND MODERN
BEST PRACTICES ON HOW TO BUILD
THESE TYPES OF FACILITIES.
AND I REALLY HOPE THAT WE WILL
SEE SOMETHING BETTER COME ALONG
THE NEXT WITH THE NEXT PROJECT
.
IN THE MEANTIME FOR PAULENE
SPECIFICALLY I WOULD ACTUALLY
DRAW YOUR ATTENTION INSTEAD TO
ONE EMAILS HE RECEIVED FROM
SETH PETERSON IN WHICH HE
SUGGESTED THAT SIMPLY THERE
SHOULD BE A COUPLE FEET
OF BUFFER BETWEEN PARKED CARS
AND THE MARKED BY BIKE LANE AS
THE CITY HAS ALREADY DONE ON
ROADS LIKE GRANGER.
I REALLY HOPE THAT THIS WILL
GET IMPLEMENTED ON PAULENE AND
FRANKLY IT WILL BE INEXCUSABLE
IF IT DOES NOT BECAUSE THERE'S
PLENTY OF SPACE WITHIN THE ROAD
TO DO THIS.
I THINK THAT'S ALL I'VE GOT
TONIGHT.
THANK YOU
.
OK, ALEX LOWE FROM THE MOMENT
YOU START SPEAKING HI.
THIS IS ALEX CALLING IN FROM
EAST NORTHEAST JUST ANOTHER I'D
LIKE TO TALK ABOUT THE VISION
PLAN THE VISION ZERO PLAN
PROGRESSIVE ALGINATE.
THE REPORT TALKS A LOT ABOUT
DRIVER EDUCATION BUT STUDY
AFTER STUDY HAS SHOWN THIS TO
BE ONE OF THE LEAST EFFECTIVE
MEANS OF ADDRESSING SAFETY.
FOR EXAMPLE, A TWENTY TWENTY
ONE STUDY IN THE JOURNAL
OF INJURY AND VIOLENCE TITLED
IS DRIVER EDUCATION CONTRIBUTOR
TOWARDS ROAD SAFETY THE
SYSTEMATIC REVIEW OF SYSTEMATIC
VIEWS.
THE AUTHORS CONCLUDED THERE WAS
NO EVIDENCE OF DRIVER EDUCATION
IS AN EFFECTIVE APPROACH TO
REDUCE IN CRASHES OR INJURIES.
SO WHAT CAN WE DO INSTEAD?
WELL ONE OF THE THINGS WE CAN
DO IS CHANGE THE STRUCTURE
OF THE ROADS.
IF YOU'RE EXAMPLES OF THOSE
WOULD BE SIDEWALK LEVEL
INTERSECTIONS WHICH FOR DRIVERS
TO AT LEAST SLOW DOWN TO A SAFE
SPEED BEFORE ENTERING THE
INTERSECTION WHILE WON'T STOP
PEOPLE FROM DOING ROLLING STOPS
,IT WILL STOP THEM FROM
BLASTING THROUGH THE
INTERSECTION OF NOW IS ALSO
INCLUDES REDUCING LANES AT
CORNERS BECAUSE DRIVERS AREN'T
SCARED OF A PERSON A PEDESTRIAN
RUNNING INTO THAT CAR THIS IS
WHY THEY KEEP LOOKING THAT TO
MAKE RIGHT TURNS ON RED AND AND
HITTING PEDESTRIANS OR ALMOST
RATHER DRIVERS NEED TO BE
SCARED OF SOMETHING THAT COULD
ACTUALLY DAMAGE THEIR CAR SUCH
AS A CAR SO YOU REDUCE THE SIZE
AROUND THESE CORNERS AND
DRIVERS WILL SLOW THAT WILL
SLOW DOWN SO THAT THEY CAN STOP
BECAUSE THEY'RE NOT ABLE TO SEE
YOUR CAR AROUND THE CORNER
UNLESS THEY'RE GOING TO THROUGH
THINGS LIKE THESE ARE STANDARD
PARTS OF THE AT TRAFFIC THAT
GUIDELINES AND THE FACT THAT
WE'RE NOT IMPLEMENTING THESE.
BUT DESPITE CLAIMING TO BE ONE
OF ONE OF THE LEADING CITIES IN
AMERICA, THIS IS QUITE FRANKLY
DISAPPOINTING DISAPPOINTING TO
ME.
I THINK THAT THAT THIS IS
SOMETHING THAT PROBABLY NEEDS
TO BE ADDRESSED BY BY COUNCIL
AND WITH WITH DIRECTIONS
TOWARDS THE THE ENGINEERING
DEPARTMENT.
BUT BUT THE THAT THAT THAT
THOSE RECOMMENDATIONS WOULD
COME FROM WITHIN THE
TRANSPORTATION COMMISSION.
FINALLY, I'D LIKE TO ADDRESS
THE QUESTION OF WHETHER OUR
APPROACH TO THE COMMUNITY
STANDARDS AND THE POLICE
DISPATCH ARE ABOUT CARS PARKED
IN BIKE LANES ARE ACTUALLY
BEING ADDRESSED BY I HAVE BEEN
TRACKING MY REPORTS ABOUT THESE
AND FEW IF ANY OF THEM RESULTS
IN WHAT SEEMS LIKE ANYTHING
COMING OUT OF THE POLICE
DEPARTMENT HAVE BEEN THEY
FOLLOWING THE REPORTS AND
CITATIONS
THE POOYA REQUESTED
THAT THESE SECRETARY SO I'M
CONCERNED THAT THAT THE COP'S
HEARING SOME SOMEONE MAKING A
REPORT ABOUT A DRIVER PUDDING'S
BICYCLISTS IN DANGER AND JUST
IGNORING IT AND NOT EVEN RECORD
IT SO I THINK IT WOULD BE GREAT
IF TRANSPORTATION COMMISSION
COULD REQUEST NOT JUST THE
REPORT ABOUT THE CITATIONS
ISSUED BUT INDEED ABOUT THE
REPORT MADE TO POLICE
DEPARTMENT.
>> THANK YOU AND HAVE A GOOD
EVENING.
>> THANK YOU.
OK, I'M NOT SAYING IN THE FIRST
TIME WE ARE DONE WITH PUBLIC
COMMENT.
ALL RIGHT.
THANK YOU.
THANK YOU TO EVERYONE FOR YOUR
COMMENTS THIS EVENING.
YOUR COMMENTS ARE VALUABLE TO
THE COMMISSION AND THANK YOU TO
THOSE WHO SAID EMAILS TO OUR
ATTENTION.
THOSE ARE THE PACKETS I
ENCOURAGE OF COURSE THE
COMMISSION MEMBERS TO TAKE A
LOOK AT THOSE EMAILS.
NEXT STEP REPORTING UPDATES IN
A DIFFERENT PART OF THE AGENDA
THAN WE'RE USED TO.
YOU RECEIVED A STAFF REPORT
PROVIDING PROJECT UPDATES WITH
YOUR AGENDA MATERIALS.
LUKE WILL REVIEW THAT REPORT
AND ANSWER ANY QUESTIONS AND
CYRUS ALSO WILL PROVIDE AN
UPDATE THE POLLING WATER MAIN
RESURFACING PROJECT.
>> THANK YOU CHAIR FOR THIS
MONTH CAPITAL PROJECT UPDATES
THE TWENTY TWENTY FOUR STREET
RESURFACING PROJECT.
THE LOCAL RESURFACING WORK IS
COMPLETE IN THE LAKEWOOD
NEIGHBORHOOD AS WELL AS OUR
NORTHPORT BROOK AND YOAST.
THE ASPHALT SIDEWALK WORK ON
GLAZIER WAY AND YOUR HEART IS
ALSO COMPLETE REMAINING
LOCATIONS INCLUDING BIRDWOOD
AND PAGE THIS MONTH WE DO NOT
HAVE ANY UPDATE FOR SIDEWALK
WORK ON THE STATE AND THE HILL
IMPROVEMENT PROJECT.
THIS PRODUCT IS NOW
SUBSTANTIALLY COMPLETE ABOUT
THE CONSTRUCTION FOR THIS
MEDICAL CENTER DRIVE BRIDGE.
THE BRIDGE CONSTRUCTION PORTION
CONTINUES.
OVER THE LAST MONTH WE MADE
SLIGHT MODIFICATION IN HOW WORK
ZONE TRAFFIC CONTROL IS IS SET
UP.
YOU CAN DETAIL WE ADDED ONE
NOTE ON THE CONTROL FOR
EASTBOUND FOGLER RIGHT TURNING
INTO THE WORK ZONE THE SEVENTH
STREET AND GREENVIEW PROJECT
THIS IS THE 7TH STREET PORTION
IS SUBSTANTIALLY COMPLETE WHILE
THE OVERALL PROJECT IS EXPECTED
TO CONTINUE INTO NOVEMBER
OF THIS YEAR NOW MOVING INTO A
CATEGORY THAT'S UNDER DESIGN OR
PLANNING RIGHT NOW THERE ARE
OTHER SIDEWALK APPROACHES IN
DESIGN SO THE FOLLOWING
LOCATIONS ARE BEING WORKED OUT
BARTON DRIVE ON THE NORTH SIDE
OF PARK AND DRIVE FROM WORKING
TO BREED AND BROCKMANN AND
CROSLAND BOTH SIDES FROM PACARD
TO FREEDOM AND INDEPENDENCE
THAT'S THE SOUTH SIDE FROM
VICTORIA TO ESX.
THE NEXT ONE IS STATE STREET
AND NORTH UNIVERSITY PROJECT.
CURRENTLY THE DESIGN WORK IS
UNDERWAY AND THE CONSTRUCTION
IS EXPECTED TO TO BE IN TWENTY
FIVE AND FIVE FOR STAY STREET
AND IN TWENTY TWENTY SIX FOR
NORTH UNIVERSITY AND FAIR.
MOVING ON TO A NIXON ROAD
CONSTRUCTION OVER THE OVER LAST
MONTH WE HAD A VIRTUAL OFFICE
HOURS THAT WAS ON AUGUST 21ST
AND 22ND.
NOW WE WILL PASS ON TO A
SERIOUS 90 TO PROVIDE SOME
FEEDBACK ABOUT THE APPALLING
WATER AND THE RESURFACING CYRUS
.
HELLO.
SO I.
I REALIZE YOU ALL HEARD A
LITTLE BIT ABOUT THIS PROJECT
AND THAT PROJECT MANAGER BILLY
WAS HERE LAST MONTH.
I WOULD BE HERE AND ALREADY SO
THERE'S A SUMMARY UP ON THE
PAGE BUT I SUPPOSE WHAT I'LL
TRY TO DO IS GO INTO A LITTLE
MORE DETAIL AND I APOLOGIZE.
I REALIZE THAT SOME OF THIS
WILL BE MIGHT BE REPETITIVE BUT
JUST AS A NOTE ABOUT WHAT IS
INVOLVED, THE PROBLEM WITH THE
DESIGN OF THIS SECTION
OF VOLUME BETWEEN SEVENTH MAIN
CONFIGURATION WILL BE SIMILAR
TO WHAT EXISTS BETWEEN SEVENTH
AND REDEEMER.
THAT SECTION OF SEVENTH TO
REDEEMER HAS PARKING ON THE
NORTH SIDE.
THE DIFFERENCE HERE WOULD BE
PARKING ON THE SOUTH SIDE FOR
DIRECT ACCESS TO THE ONLY PARK
.
SOME KEY DIFFERENCES WILL BE
THAT THERE WILL BE VERTICAL
DEVICES TO SLOW TRAFFIC DOWN SO
WE'LL HAVE GREAT CROSSWALKS
SPEED TABLE AND A IN
INTERSECTION AND THE DESIGN
WORK.
THE GOAL IS TO BRING THE
VEHICLE OPERATING SPEEDS TO
TWENTY FIVE MILES PER HOUR AND
TO WORK ON A SPEED LIMIT CHANGE
IN TANDEM WITH THE PROJECT.
SO BECAUSE OF THAT DESIGN
CHANGE WE BELIEVE WE CAN SIGN
THAT AS A TWENTY FIVE MILE PER
HOUR SPEED LIMIT AS AT ONCE THE
DESIGN ONCE THE PRODUCT IS
INSTALLED.
SPEAKING BRIEFLY TO THE
COMPRESSION OF FLOATING VERSUS
CURBSIDE PARKING THIS IN IN A
NUTSHELL PAULINE IS A MINOR
STREET SO AND ALL I DID DIDN'T
ABILITIES BIKE ROUTE ON A MINOR
.
IT DOES LOOK DIFFERENT THAN ON
A MAJOR STREET AND ALSO LOOKS
DIFFERENT THAN WHAT WE HAVE ON
THE LOCAL STREET.
SO ACCORDING TO OUR PLAN THE
APPROPRIATE TREATMENT FOR ONE
OF THE APPROPRIATE TREATMENTS
FOR A MINOR STREET WOULD BE
OFFERED BIKE LANE SO WHAT WE
KIND OF AIMED TO DO AND THE
REASON WE INCLUDED PARKING AS
AN OPTION WAS TO POTENTIALLY GO
ABOVE AND BEYOND IF WE COULD
MANAGE A FEW QUESTIONS I'D SAY
A SECONDARY QUESTION THAT WE
AND WE COMMUNICATED THROUGHOUT
OUR ENGAGEMENT WAS PUBLIC
FEEDBACK.
WE WE STRESSED OVER AND OVER
AGAIN THAT PUBLIC FEEDBACK IS
ONLY JUST ONE ELEMENT OF WHAT
WE CONSIDER THE MORE CRITICAL
ISSUE THAT WE ARE CONTINUING TO
WORK THROUGH AND HAVE NOT QUITE
SOLVED FOR WHEN IT COMES TO A
FLOATING PARKING PARKING
PROTECTED BIKE LANE IN THIS
TYPE OF ENVIRONMENT RELATES TO
OUR SOLID WASTE SERVICE AS I'M
SURE YOU ALL HAVE APPRECIATED
IN YOUR PROJECT UPDATES AND
OTHER FROM WITHIN ON PROJECTS
AND AS YOU'VE SEEN THE DESIGN
OF DIFFERENT PROJECTS BE
PRESENTED TO YOU, WE GENERALLY
HAVE FAIRLY LIMITED WITHIN OUR
RIGHTS AWAY AND UNFORTUNATELY
ESPECIALLY OUTSIDE OF OUR
DOWNTOWN THOSE WITH TEND TO BE
MORE LIMITED AND WE TEND TO
KIND OF ASK MORE SO WE HAVE
CURBSIDE TRASH COMPOST AND
RECYCLING SERVICE FOR EVERY
RESIDENTS IN THAT AREA.
AND SO WHAT WE HAVEN'T FIGURED
OUT EXACTLY HOW TO SOLVE FOR IS
INSTALLING A PARKING PROTECTED
BIKE LANE WHILE ALSO
MAINTAINING THAT LEVEL
OF SOLWAY SERVICE.
SO I THINK ONE OF THE
SUGGESTIONS I HEARD AS WELL WAS
TO ADD SOME BUFFER SPACE
BETWEEN THE PARKED CARS AND AND
THE VEHICLES AND THE I GUESS
THE SHORT VERSION IS IS THAT
THEY'RE NOT REALLY EXTRA SPACE
TO DO THAT WHILE ALSO
MAINTAINING THE SERVICE BECAUSE
WE NEED A THREE FOOT BUFFER ON
EACH SIDE OF THE ROAD IN ORDER
FOR THE SOLID WASTE SERVICE FOR
EACH SIDE OF THE ROAD.
TO BE FAIR, THAT'S WHAT WE'VE
BEEN THAT'S THAT'S THE MINIMAL
AMOUNT OF SPACE WE NEED FOR
SOLID WASTE SERVICE TO OCCUR
ALL BY OFFERING TO OTHER SORT
OF BACKS OR I GUESS TO OTHER
COMMENTS.
ONE IS THAT WE HAVE YOU KNOW, I
REALIZE THAT IF THE
DISAPPOINTMENT TO THEM WE WOULD
LIKE THIS TO BE A SORT OF THE
BEST FACILITY WE CAN MAKE NO
DOUBT IN MY MIND WOULD BE
PARKING PROTECTED FACILITY EVEN
THOUGH LIKE I SAID, OUR PLAN
DOESN'T NECESSARILY CALL FOR
THAT STANDARD ON A MINOR ROAD.
BUT THE TRUTH IS WE JUST
HAVEN'T SOLVED IT SO THE
WHAT
WE WHAT WE DID JUST AS A
CONFIRMATION IS WE WE HAVE
LOOKED AT CRASH DATA ON THE
ENTIRE SECTION OF THE STADIUM
WHICH INCLUDES SEVEN REDEEM
SECTION THAT HAS THE SAME
PARKING CONFIGURATION AND THERE
HAVE BEEN NO CRASHES OF ANY
TYPE AND AND SINCE THAT PRODUCT
HAD BEEN INSTALLED.
SO I REALIZED THAT THE RISK
OF DOORING IS YOU KNOW, THERE
IS A RISK THERE.
IT'S NOT THE SAME RISK AS WHAT
WE WOULD HAVE IN A DOWNTOWN
SETTING WHERE WE HAVE MORE
TURNOVER OF PARKING.
I SAY THIS AS SOMEONE WHO BIKES
FALLING FAIRLY REGULARLY IT
WITH MY WITH MY DAUGHTER AS
WELL.
BUT THE THE OTHER AND I THINK
THAT'S RIGHT BECAUSE LIKE I
SAID AS MUCH AS I WOULD LIKE
TO
BE IN A PLACE WHERE WE CAN
INSTALL THE HIGHEST LEVEL
OF TREATMENT WHERE WE IN THESE
KINDS OF SITUATIONS WE HAVE TO
BE ABLE TO SOLVE FOR THE
TECHNICAL CHALLENGES AS WELL
AND YOU KNOW, PRIOR TO JOINING
STAFF I WAS ON TRANSPORTATION
COMMISSION AND THAT'S SOMETHING
THAT I THINK I APPRECIATE MORE
NOW THAT I AM ON STAFF AND WORK
WITH THE OTHER UNITS OF THE
CITY TO REALIZE THAT EVEN
THOUGH ON PAPER SOMETHING LOOKS
RELATIVELY EASY TO SWITCH THE
CURBSIDE PARKING VERSUS THE
FLOATING PARKING, THERE ARE
SOME SIGNIFICANT TECHNICAL
CHALLENGES THAT WE STILL HAVE
TO WORK THROUGH.
I GUESS I'LL PAUSE THERE.
ALL RIGHT.
THANK YOU, SIRS.
AND AN UPDATE TO THE SAME
PROGRAM NOW BUSINESS IN PAST
HAS WE DID RECEIVE COUNCIL
APPROVAL REGARDING THE REMOVAL
PARKING TO MAKE THIS PRODUCT
FORWARD.
>> AND NEXT ONE IS FIFTH AVENUE
RESEARCH SEEING INCLUDING WATER
MAIN WORK.
THE OVERALL THERE ARE TWO
PRODUCTS IN THERE.
THEY OVERLAP THE THE OVERALL
SCOPE IS FROM MADISON ON THE
SOUTH END TO WILLIAM ON NORTH
END THE SMARA SECTION FROM
PAGAD FOR JEFFERSON THAT'S THE
THE WATER MAIN WORK READY TO
TRANSPORTATION.
WE'RE WORKING TO TO ADD ALL
AGES AND ABILITIES THAT WORK
AND THE DETAILED FORMAT AT THIS
MOMENT IS GOING TO INCLUDE BOTH
STANDARD BIKE LANES AND THE
CONTRAFLOW BIKE LANES
CONSTRUCTION IS GOING TO BE
TWENTY TWENTY FIVE AND THE ONES
WE HAVE MORE DETAILED DESIGN
WILL PRESENT TO THE COMMISSION
THE NEXT PROJECT IS DOWNTOWN
AREA CIRCULATION STUDY FOR THIS
STUDY THERE WILL BE A SECOND
ROUND COMMUNITY ENGAGEMENT IN
OCTOBER AND THE STUDY TEAM ALSO
PRESENT TO TRANSMISSION
COMMISSION IN OCTOBER .
WE'RE STILL WORKING ON THE
DATES SO FAR LOOKING LIKE OUR
COMMISSION MEETING WILL BE
OCTOBER 16TH AND THE DATE FOR
THE COMMITTEE ENGAGEMENT WILL
BE ONE WEEK LATER.
WE'LL TRY TO PROVIDE AS MUCH
DETAIL AS AS WE CAN WHEN WE
PRESENT TO THE COMMISSION AS
OTHER UPDATES ON INFORMATION.
UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN SMART
INTERSECTION PROJECT IS NOW
ENTERING A VERY PEAK SEASON OR
STAGE FOUR FIELD.
THE INSTALLATION OF DEVICES THE
MAIN CORRIDORS TO BE EQUIPPED
INCLUDE THE ELSWORTH FOLDER AND
THE MAP ON THE STADIUM AND THE
INSTALLATION WORK IS EXPECTED
TO BE FINISHED IN THE FALL
OF THIS YEAR.
MOVING ON TO SOME UPDATES FROM
THE OFFICE OF SUSTAINABILITY
AND INNOVATIONS.
OH I RECENTLY LAUNCHED A
COMMERCIAL VEHICLE COMMERCIAL
EV CHARGER DISCOUNT PROGRAM TO
DISTRIBUTE THE FREE AND
DISCOUNTED EV CHARGERS AT
COMMERCIAL SITES AND MULTI UNIT
DWELLINGS APPLICATIONS ARE
BEING COLLECTED AND THE MORE
INFORMATION ARE IS AVAILABLE
ONLINE WAS THE LINK IN THIS
FILE.
THE CITY WAS ALSO RECENTLY
NOTIFIED OF ITS CHARGING AND
FIELDING INFRASTRUCTURE PROGRAM
AROUND ONE B AWARD.
THIS IS AN AWARD
OF APPROXIMATELY TWO POINT
EIGHT MILLION DOLLARS TO HELP
THE CITY DESIGN AND THE
INSTALLED DOZENS MORE PUBLIC EV
CHARGING PORTS IN THE C
REGARDING STREETLIGHT
IMPLEMENTATION GEEKY HAS
REPORTED FIXING EIGHT HUNDRED
FIFTY ONE STREETLIGHTS SO FAR
IN THIS KIND OF THREE YEAR.
MOVING ON TO TALK ABOUT TRAFFIC
CALMING PROGRAMS THIS IS THE
NEIGHBOR WITH TRAFFIC CALMING.
WE HAVE RECEIVED THE COUNCIL
APPROVAL ON THE OF TRAFFIC
COMING PROJECT BIKE OUR PILOT
PROGRAM.
WE RECEIVED ONE ADDITIONAL
REQUEST AND IT WAS APPROVED FOR
MOTOR CITY BICYCLE.
SO THAT'S LOCATED ON WASHINGTON
AVENUE.
THE INSTALLATION WILL BE THIS
MONTH.
WE'LL BE ABLE TO TALK ABOUT
SAFE STREET AND ROADS FOR ALL
USERS.
GRANT THE NEAR MISS THE
EVALUATION PASS IS UNDERWAY AND
THE PACKAGE IS FOR SELF OUR
PROCUREMENT THAT IS UNDER
DEVELOPMENT.
THE GRANT COORDINATOR CONTRACT
IS NEARING COMPLETION AND THERE
IS A PROJECT INITIATION MEETING
THAT'S SCHEDULED FOR LATER IN
THIS MONTH FOR BIKE PARKING
ELEMENTARY TASK ALL NON THE
DISTRICT PARKING FACILITIES
HAVE BEEN IMMORTALIZED AND THE
DEA HAS A DOWNTOWN BIKE PARKING
STRATEGY AND THEIR DEVELOPMENT
WITH AN UPDATED INVENTORY
OF DOWNTOWN BIKE PARKING
FACILITIES.
THEN THERE IS ANOTHER UPDATE
FOR CARBON REDUCTION PROGRAM
GRANTS AFTER THIS UPDATE IS
SLIGHTLY OUTDATED.
IT'S A STAFF REPORT THAT WE
HAVE RECEIVED NEPA CLEARANCE
AND FUNDING APPLICATION AND IT
JUST HAPPENED EARLIER THIS
MONTH FOR EDUCATION AND
ENCOURAGEMENT THAT WE'LL BE
ROLLING OUT A NEW CAMPAIGN
THAT'S CALLED SLOW SPEED SAVE
LIVES AND THIS WILL BE AT THE
GREEN FAIR THAT IS I THINK THE
MAIN EVENT IS AT THIS FRIDAY
AFTERNOON.
I'M MOVING ON TO PROVIDE AN
UPDATE ABOUT FLASHING YELLOW
SIGNAL OPERATIONS AND THE
ACTIVATION OF PEDESTRIAN CALLS
WILL CANCEL FLASHING YELLOW
OPERATIONS.
SO OVER THIS MONTH WE ARE
WORKING ON THREE LOCATIONS ALL
ALONG AYLSWORTH FOUR SORRY
ABOUT THAT OUTSOURCING OF OUR
CITY.
THIS INTERSECTION IS COMPLETE
AND STAFF RIGHT NOW ARE WORKING
ON ELSWORTH AT ST. SCHOOL AND
BRAEBURN.
>> THEN WE'LL TAKE A QUICK LOOK
AT THE PEDESTRIAN AND THE
BICYCLE RELATED CRASH SITE.
SO OVER THE MONTH OF AUGUST
THERE WERE FOUR PEDESTRIAN
RELATED CRASH DATA.
THERE'S ONE THAT'S FATAL AND
THE THREE THAT ARE BELOW INJURY
FOR BICYCLE RELATED INVOLVE THE
CRASH DATA.
WE HAVE A TOTAL OF FOUR AS
WELL.
THERE WAS ONE ALAO INJURY TO
ALLOW INJURIES AND THERE'S ONE
THAT'S PROPERTY DAMAGE ONLY.
SO THAT WRAPS UP THE STAFF
UPDATE FOR CAPITAL PROJECTS.
>> BACK TO YOUR CHAIR.
THANK YOU.
LET'S MOVE AHEAD TO LAY EYES ON
REPORTS ANY COMMISSIONERS THEY
SERVE AS A LIAISON TO ANOTHER
BODY OR ORGANIZATION ARE
INVITED NOW TO PROVIDE BRIEF
REPORTS UPDATES ANYONE
ALL
RIGHT SEEING NONE COMMISSION NO
COMMUNICATIONS THIS TIME ALL
COMMISSIONERS ARE INVITED TO
PROVIDE REPORTS AND UPDATES IF
THEY LIKE ANY COMMISSION MEMBER
COMMUNICATIONS
LIEUTENANT
SCHERBA
, THANKS FOR NOT JUST
FOR REAL QUICK UPDATE ON WHERE
A CRASH ON NORTH MAPLE
INVOLVING A BICYCLISTS AND PETE
HAD DOCUMENTED OUTLINED THE
KIND OF DETAILS REQUESTING THAT
A PARTICULAR SIGN BE REMOVED
AND IT AFFECTED THE LINE
OF SIGHT OR VISIBILITY FOR
PEOPLE EXITING THE DRIVE THERE.
AND I JUST WANT TO REPORT THAT
THE SIGN WE DID WE DID LOOK
INTO THAT AND THE SIGN HAS BEEN
REMOVED.
THANK YOU.
THANK YOU FOR MAKING US AWARE
OF THAT BEING THE LEAD ON
GETTING THAT TAKEN CARE
OF BECAUSE I WAS ABSOLUTELY AN
ISSUE THAT NEEDED ATTENTION
SUPER.
THANK YOU.
I SEE LARRY GOT YOUR INTEREST.
YEAH, IT WOULD COME IN ON TIME.
OUR COMMISSION ON DISABILITY
ISSUES WE'RE EXPLORING THE
POSSIBILITY OF GETTING STAFF
REMOVED IN THE MIDDLE OF THE
THIRD STREET OF THIRD STREET
ACROSS FROM ST. LUKE'S TO AND
THAT'S ALL I GOT FOR THIS
COMMISSION ANYWAY.
>> THANK YOU VERY MUCH.
>> ALL RIGHT.
MOVING ON THEN THERE ARE NO
BUSINESS ITEMS FOR THE MONTH
OF SEPTEMBER.
SO FOR INFORMATION FOR
DISCUSSION WE HAVE ONE LARGE
TOPIC SO LET'S GET TO THAT.
IT IS THE VISION ZERO PLAN
PROGRESS REPORT STAFF PRESENTS
AN ANNUAL UPDATE ON CRASH DATA
EVALUATION TO THE
TRANSPORTATION COMMISSION
USUALLY IN THE FALL FOR THIS
YEAR'S UPDATE INSURED FROM THE
POLICE DEPARTMENT AND CYNTHIA
WRITING HERE FROM
SHOES AND
FLOWERS FROM ENGINEERING WILL
JOINTLY PRESENT AND ALONG WITH
THE PRESENTERS I THINK OR
ANYONE ELSE HERE.
YEAH, CHIEF PATRICK MAGUIRE IS
ALSO AVAILABLE TO ANSWER
QUESTIONS.
SO WITH THAT I'LL LET THE
PRESENTERS TAKE IT AWAY.
>> ALL RIGHT.
GOOD EVENING.
CALLING IN FROM DENVER THIS
EVENING FROM THE FEDERAL
HIGHWAY EXCHANGE.
SO IF OUR VOLUME CUTS OUT,
PLEASE DO LET US KNOW THAT AND
JUST WANTED TO LET EVERYONE
KNOW VISION ZERO PROGRESS PLAN
REPORT THIS IS A BIG TOPIC AND
THAT TO SET THE STAGE FOR THIS
PRESENTATION THIS EVENING
ACHIEVING VISION ZERO WILL TAKE
EVERYONE IT WILL TAKE ALL
TRAVELERS AND A SHIFT AND
ACKNOWLEDGMENT THAT TRAFFIC
DEATHS ARE NO LONGER ACCEPTABLE
AND THEY ARE PREVENTABLE.
TONIGHT WE WILL HAVE LIEUTENANT
MIKE SCHERBA FROM THE ANN ARBOR
POLICE DEPARTMENT PRESENTING
CYNTHIA RENNINGER TO MY LEFT
AND I WILL BE CHIMING IN JUST A
LITTLE BIT HERE.
THERE.
>> AND SO JUST TO QUICKLY GO
OVER TONIGHT'S AGENDA, WE'LL BE
DISCUSSING THE TRAFFIC SAFETY
PLAN AND VISION ZERO THROUGH A
SAFE SYSTEMS APPROACH.
WE'LL REVIEW A CITYWIDE CRASH
SUMMARY AND TRENDS WILL HAVE AN
ENGINEERING REVIEW OF THAT
SIMILAR INFORMATION AND WE'LL
BE DISCUSSING PROGRAM AREAS AND
NOW I'D LIKE TO TURN IT OVER TO
LIEUTENANT SCHERBA.
THANK YOU, SUZANNE AND
COMMISSIONER, I APPRECIATE THE
OPPORTUNITY TO PRESENT TONIGHT
COLLECTIVELY WITH ENGINEERING
THE POLICE DEPARTMENT IS
ROLLING OUT A NEW TRAFFIC
SAFETY PLAN AND IT IS DATA DATA
DRIVEN, DATA BASED AND I WILL
GET INTO THE WHYS IN THE HOUSE
OF THAT WAS DEVELOPED IN THE
PRESENTATION TONIGHT.
BUT ESSENTIALLY IT WAS LOOKING
AT THE LAST FIVE YEARS OF CRASH
DATA SPECIFICALLY LOOKING AT
THE POLICE DEPARTMENTS, WHAT WE
CALL OUR WE CALL THEM CALL OUTS
AND THE REASON TO CALL THEM
CALL OUTS IS BECAUSE WE HAVE AN
ACCIDENT INVESTIGATION TEAM AND
THAT TEAM IS NOT WORKING 24
SEVEN AND SO WHEN THERE IS A
TRAFFIC ACCIDENT THAT APPEARS
TO BE POTENTIALLY FATAL OR HAVE
A GRAVE INJURY INVOLVED, THE ON
DUTY SUPERVISOR WILL MAKE IT.
WE'LL MAKE A CALL OUT TO THE
CRASH INVESTIGATORS, THE DESK
CRASH INVESTIGATORS TO RESPOND
TO THE SCENE TO DO A WHAT WE
CALL IT AGAIN IN EHI OR IN
ADVANCED CRASH INVESTIGATION.
AND SO WHAT WE DID IS WE TOOK
AGAIN THE LAST FIVE YEARS DATA
AND WE LOOKED AT WHERE ARE
THESE CALL OUTS OCCURRING?
SO WHERE ARE OUR MOST SERIOUS
CRASHES OCCURRING AND WE
PLOTTED THEM ON A MAP AND WE
FOUND SOME TRENDS AND LOCATIONS
WHERE WE HAVE CLUSTERS OF THESE
CRASHES OCCURRING AND THERE ARE
THREE THREE SIGNIFICANT
CORRIDORS WHERE THIS IS TAKING
PLACE.
SO WE'VE BROKEN DOWN OUR
TRAFFIC SAFETY PLAN AGAIN
SPECIFICALLY LOOKING AT THESE
THREE LOCATIONS THERE IS A
JACKSON CORRIDOR.
THERE'S A WATCH CORRIDOR AND
THEN THERE'S A PACARD CORRIDOR
.
>> SO OUR THREE CORRIDORS ARE
BEING WOKE UP.
WE'RE GOING TO LABEL THEM AS
SAFETY CORRIDORS.
SO AS OUR TRAFFIC PLAN IS
UNFOLDING, WE'VE GOT THE PLAN
NOW AND WE'RE NOW IN THE
EXECUTION STAGE OF THAT PLAN TO
AND AGAIN, I'M JUST GOING TO
GIVE YOU A LITTLE BIT OF A
PREVIEW OF WHAT'S TO COME BUT
WILL MANAGE TRAFFIC EDUCATION
AND ENFORCEMENT WORK WITH
ENGINEERING, DO EVALUATION WORK
ON SUMIKO THINGS IN AISLE SIX
YEARS WILL BE INVOLVED IN OUR
TRAFFIC PLAN GOING FORWARD AND
AGAIN WE'RE STILL PUTTING A FEW
OF THE EXECUTION PIECES
TOGETHER AND WE WILL BE
IMPLEMENTING THAT IN THE VERY
NEAR FUTURE SO THE STAFF WILL
HAVE A MISSION THAT WE'VE COME
UP WITH.
AS FOR OUR TRAFFIC UNIT AND TO
MAKE TRAVELING IN ANN ARBOR
SAFER BY CHANGING DRIVER
BEHAVIOR THROUGH EDUCATION, LAW
ENFORCEMENT AND ENGINEERING.
>> NOW THAT'S THE THREE MOST
OF US ARE FAMILIAR WITH THOSE
THREE AND WE'RE GOING TO
ACTUALLY ENHANCE THOSE THREE
E'S A LITTLE BIT IN A LATER
SLIDE WE'LL SEE THEM ALL AND
WE'LL TALK ABOUT HOW THESE
DIFFERENT PIECES WORK TOGETHER
AND HOW WE WE ALL AS SUZANNE
MENTIONED, HOW IT'S NOT THE PD
NOT GOING TO SOLVE THIS
ENGINEERING'S I'M NOT GOING TO
SOLVE THIS EDUCATION ALONE IS
NOT GOING TO SOLVE THIS.
WE NEED TO WORK TOGETHER TOWARD
THIS COMMON GOAL TO REACH OUT
VISION ZERO SO MOST OF US KNOW
THIS ALREADY BUT VISION ZERO IS
IT'S AN APPROACH TO ELIMINATING
DEATH AND SERIOUS INJURIES FROM
TRAFFIC CRASHES.
IT'S THE VISION IT'S THE HOPE
THAT WE CAN PREVENT AND WE'RE
NOT IT REALIZES THAT WE
COLLECTIVELY ARE NOT GOING TO
PREVENT ALL CRASHES.
THERE IS HUMAN ERROR.
THERE ARE FACTORS THAT ARE
GOING TO HAPPEN THAT TRAFFIC
CRASHES ARE GOING TO HAPPEN.
HOWEVER, THROUGH THESE
DIFFERENT APPROACHES WE CAN
LESSEN THE SEVERITY AND AGAIN
WITH THE GOAL OF REDUCING THE
DEATH AND REDUCING SERIOUS
INJURIES.
>> SO LOOKING AT OUR CHART
HERE, WE'VE GOT A TRADITIONAL
APPROACH.
TRAFFIC DEATHS ARE INEVITABLE.
HUMANS ARE PERFECT.
WE CAN PREVENT ALL COLLISIONS.
PEOPLE ARE INDIVIDUALLY
RESPONSIBLE AND IT'S EXPENSIVE
TO DO THESE THINGS.
WE SHIFT THAT TO OUR VISION
ZERO IN THAT TRAFFIC DEATHS ARE
PREVENTABLE.
HUMAN FAILINGS ARE GOING TO
HAPPEN.
PEOPLE ARE GOING TO MAKE
MISTAKES.
THEY GET DISTRACTED.
THEY HAVE A QUICK GLANCES.
AS SOMEONE MENTIONED EARLIER,
WE'RE CONSTANTLY LOOKING LEFT
TO TURN RIGHT AND NOT WATCHING
THE SIDEWALK AND THINGS LIKE
THAT.
THAT'S THAT'S A VERY GOOD
EXAMPLE OF WHERE A LOT
OF ACCIDENTS OCCUR, HUMAN ERROR
IS GOING TO OCCUR.
BUT WHAT CAN THIS APPROACH DO
TO HELP REDUCE THE SEVERITY
OF THOSE CRASHES AND PREVENT
THOSE FATALITIES AGAINST THE
SYSTEMS APPROACH?
IT'S GOING TO TAKE ALL OF US
WORKING TOGETHER AND IT'S NOT
NECESSARILY EXPENSIVE.
IT IS A COLLABORATIVE EFFORT
TOWARD THIS GOAL SO WE CAN TAKE
THAT LAST MYTH OUT OF THERE TO
THE VISION ZERO THE SAFE
SYSTEMS APPROACH.
IF YOU TAKE A LOOK HERE, WE'VE
GOT TO AND I TOUCHED ON SOME
OF THESE THINGS ALREADY SAFE
ROAD USER THAT'S GOING TO
PROBABLY GO TOWARD OUR
EDUCATION, OUR EFFORTS TO HELP
DRIVERS REALIZE THAT THEY NEED
TO PARTICIPATE IN BEHAVIORS
THAT ARE SAFE THAT CAN BEST
ALLOW THEM TO CONTINUE IN A
SAFE MANNER ALONG THEIR
TRAVELS.
THE SAME VEHICLES EVERY YEAR
OUR DESIGNERS THAT THIS DOESN'T
NECESSARILY HAVE ANYTHING TO DO
WITH OUR IN HOUSE OR OUR
DEPARTMENT FOLKS BUT SAFE
VEHICLES THAT THE MANUFACTURERS
ARE CONSTANTLY AND CONTINUALLY
TRYING TO MAKE VEHICLES SAFER
WITH AUTOMATIC BRAKING, ALL
SORTS OF OTHER SAFETY FEATURES
TO HELP MAKE THE ROADWAYS
SAFER.
THE SAFE SPEED TO SOMETHING
OBVIOUSLY WE'RE MANAGING HERE
THE TRANSPORTATION COMMISSION
HAS A BIG VOICE IN THE SPEED
LIMITS ON OUR DIFFERENT
ROADWAYS, OUR ROAD DIETS AND
OTHER THINGS TO TRY TO KEEP THE
SPEEDS DOWN BECAUSE THE DATA
SHOWS THAT WHEN THE SPEEDS ARE
UP THAT'S WHEN OUR INJURIES ARE
GOING TO BE THE GREATEST ARE
SAFE ROADS ARE OUR STREETS AND
OUR STREETS.
BOOKS ARE ENGINEERING FOLKS
MAKING THE ROADWAYS AND USING
BEST PRACTICES TO MAKE THOSE
THOSE ROADWAYS THE SAFEST AND
WELCOME CITY TO TOUCH A LITTLE
BIT ON ON MORE OF OUR SAFE
ROADS EFFORTS IF YOU IF YOU
HAVEN'T GOT FANATICS OK, SORRY
I DIDN'T REALIZE YOU WANTED ME
TO JUMP IN RIGHT NOW I WILL
JUST SAY THAT WE WILL GET INTO
A LITTLE BIT LATER IN THE
PRESENTATION SOME OF THOSE
SYSTEMIC IMPROVEMENTS THAT
WE'VE BEEN ROUTINELY MAKING
FROM THE ENGINEERING
PERSPECTIVE WILL CATCH THAT A
LITTLE LATER.
>> THANK YOU VERY MUCH FOR THE
NEXT FLIGHT.
>> THIS JUST BREAKS DOWN A
LITTLE BIT OF THAT LAST SLIDE
THERE.
SO BY COMMITTING TO ZERO
DEATHS, BY ADDRESSING ASPECTS
OF THE CRASH RISK THROUGH THE
ELEMENTS OF THE SAFE SYSTEM
BELOW WE'RE DOING OUR SAFE ROAD
USERS SAFE VEHICLE SAFE SPEEDS
,SAFE ROADS.
I DIDN'T TOUCH ON IT BUT THE
POST CRASH HERE.
SO THAT'S SOMETHING THAT WE AS
A AS A CITY HAVE DONE.
I KNOW THAT ACA IS OUR IS OUR
PRIMARY AMBULANCE SERVICE IN
THE CITY AND WE KNOW THAT DUE
TO A VARIETY OF FACTORS BEYOND
OUR CONTROL THAT THEY HAVE HAD
SOME DIFFICULTIES IN
MAINTAINING ENOUGH RIGS ON THE
ROAD AND AVAILABLE AT ANY GIVEN
TIME.
AND I KNOW THAT THE FIRE
DEPARTMENT AND CHIEF KENNEDY
HAS MAY BE SPEAKING OUT
OF SCHOOL HERE BUT WE HAVE AN
AMBULANCE NOW THAT THE FIRE
DEPARTMENT RUNS AND SO IT'S AN
ADDITIONAL
RESOURCE TO BE ABLE
TO GET TO THOSE CRASH VICTIMS
IN A MORE TIMELY MANNER.
SO HERE'S OUR ARE OUR
SUCCESSES.
OBVIOUSLY WE HAVE ENFORCEMENT
ENGINEERING AND EVALUATION,
EDUCATION, EQUITY AND I'LL TALK
A LITTLE BIT ABOUT EQUITY LATER
AND THEN ENCOURAGEMENT MAKING
MAKING IT POSSIBLE FOR THOSE
DRIVERS TO WANT TO HAVE THAT
SAFER DRIVING HABITS AND THE
BETTER DRIVING BEHAVIOR TO MAKE
THE ROAD MORE SAFE FOR
EVERYBODY.
>> SO WHAT WE DID IN THE IN THE
POLICE DEPARTMENT IS WE AGAIN
WE STARTED WITH A FIVE YEAR
SEARCH OF THE DATA AND AS
ANYONE WHO'S DONE ANY KIND
OF DATA MINING AND IN LOOKING
AT ANY KIND OF SPECIFIC PROBLEM
DATA CAN BE LOOKED AT A LOT
OF DIFFERENT WAYS WE CAN LOOK
AT OK, WHERE THE WHERE THE
GREATEST NUMBER OF CRASHES
HAPPENING AND THINGS LIKE THAT.
BUT WHAT WE DID IS WE REALLY
FOCUSED ON THE ONE THING WHICH
WAS WHERE OUR CALL OUTS
HAPPENING.
THESE ARE MOST SERIOUS CRASHES.
SO WHERE ARE PEOPLE GETTING THE
MOST INJURED AND OR KILLED?
SO WE TOOK THOSE LOCATIONS AND
WE PUT THEM WE GOT ONE MORE
SLED UP THERE AND WE'RE GOING
TO GET TO OUR CRASH IF WE CAN
GO TO THE NEXT ONE FOR THE
OTHER.
SO OUR FOUR SERIOUS NATIONAL
REVIEW AGAIN WHAT WE'RE LOOKING
AT IS WE'RE LOOKING AT THOSE
ACCIDENTS THAT REQUIRED A
NATIONAL INVESTIGATION CALL OUT
AND AGAIN WHAT THE CRITERIA
THERE IS IS TYPICALLY HOW IT
TRANSPIRES IS DISPATCH GETS A
PHONE CALL FROM EITHER INVOLVED
PARTY OR A LOT OF TIMES THAT
SOMEONE IS NOT INVOLVED BUT
IT'S SOMEONE WHO PASSES BY TO
SAY THERE'S THAT CRASH OVER
HERE LAW OFFICERS WHO ARE
AROUND THE ROAD WILL RESPOND
AND MAKE AN INITIAL ASSESSMENT
OF WHAT'S IN FRONT OF US, WHAT
WE SEE AND THEN TAKE THAT AND
SAY OK, THIS IS A BAD ONE.
WE NEED TO GET ADVANCED
ACCIDENT INVESTIGATION HERE AND
THE COUNTY LAST NIGHT COUNTY
HAS A COUNTYWIDE CRASH
INVESTIGATION TEAM OF WHICH THE
ENTIRE POLICE DEPARTMENT IS A
PART OF OUR INVESTIGATORS WILL
HANDLE ANY IN CITY CRASH.
THERE HAVE BEEN A FEW OCCASIONS
WHERE OUR CITY FOLKS ARE NOT
AVAILABLE SO WE HAVE A COUNTY
INVESTIGATOR COME IN.
LIKEWISE, IF SOMETHING HAPPENED
IN THE COUNTY THE COUNTY WOULD
BE THE PRIMARY INVESTIGATOR ON
THAT AND IF FOR SOME REASON THE
COUNTY INVESTIGATORS ARE NOT
AVAILABLE, A CITY OFFICER WOULD
BE DISPATCHED THERE TO THE
ADVANCED INVESTIGATION.
SO WHAT WE DID IS WE KIND
OF LOOKED AT WHAT WHAT IS THE
PROBLEM BY SCANNING WE SAID
WELL, ARE TOO MANY CRASHES THAT
RESULT IN SERIOUS INJURY
OF DEATH.
WE USE THE DATA FROM THE LAST
FIVE YEARS TO PINPOINT THE ROOT
CAUSES AND LOCATION YOU'LL SEE
IN A LATER SLIDE WHAT THE ROOT
CAUSES ARE FROM THOSE CRASHES
AND IT'S GOING TO BE DRIVING
TOO FAST OR EXCESSIVE SPEED OR
FAILURE TO YIELD.
THOSE ARE GOING TO BE THE TWO
GREATEST ONES THAT WE COME
ACROSS FOR THESE SERIOUS
CRASHES.
SO HOW ARE WE GOING TO WHAT ARE
WE GOING TO DO?
WHAT RESPONSE WILL WE PROVIDE?
WELL, WE'RE GOING TO DRIVER
BEHAVIOR THROUGH AGAIN
EDUCATION, ENFORCEMENT,
ENGINEERING AS WELL AS OUR
OTHER OTHER ISSUES THAT ARE
INVOLVED THAT WE MENTIONED
EARLIER.
OUR ASSESSMENT IS WE'RE GOING
TO TAKE A LOOK AT HOW THIS
RESPONSE WORKS, HOW OUR SAFETY
CORRIDORS WORK AND I'LL EXPLAIN
A BIT MORE ON HOW THEY'RE GOING
TO WORK IN A LATER SLIDE AND
WE'RE GOING TO EVALUATE IS THIS
IS THIS METHODOLOGY EFFECTIVE
AND THE DATA WILL TELL US THAT
WHETHER OR NOT WE'RE MAKING A
DIFFERENCE OR NOT AND IF WE'RE
NOT, WE'LL MAKE THOSE
ADJUSTMENTS THAT ARE NEEDED IN
ORDER TO TRY A DIFFERENT
APPROACH OR MAKE MODIFICATIONS
AND IF WHAT IF WHAT'S WORKING
THEN WE'LL CONTINUE TO DO
CONTINUE ON THE SAME EFFORTS
THAT WE'RE DOING SO THESE ARE
TRAFFIC COMPLAINTS.
SO OUR TRAFFIC UNIT RECEIVES
COMPLAINTS.
SOME OF THEM ARE STIK THROUGH A
QUICK FIX.
SOME OF THEM ARE BEING EMAIL
AND SOME OF THEM ARE FROM PHONE
CALLS.
AND IF YOU LOOK AT YEAR BY YEAR
WE'RE LOOKING ABOUT JUST
BETWEEN TWO AND THREE AND FOUR
HUNDRED DEPENDING ON THE ON THE
YEAR OF COMPLAINTS.
AND AGAIN WHAT WE'RE LOOKING AT
IS THE MAJORITY OF THEM INVOLVE
SOME SORT OF SPEED RELATED
VIOLATION.
THAT'S THE GREATEST COMPLAINT
OUR MOST NUMEROUS COMPLAINT
THAT WE HAVE IS A TRAFFIC
COMPLAINTS AND OF THOSE
COMPLAINTS THE MAJORITY
OF SPEEDING RELATED WE HAVE ONE
LITTLE NOTE IN THERE ON THAT ON
THE PREVIOUS SLIDE IT BREAKS
DOWN HOW MANY ARE SCHOOLS
RELATED BECAUSE WE DO GET A LOT
OF SPECIFIC SCHOOL ZONE RELATED
COMPLAINTS AS WELL AND TO THE
TO BREAK THOSE DOWN OF THOSE
100 THAT JUST SOME DAY THAT WE
LOOKED AT WHEN DEVELOPING THIS
PLAN AND THOUGHT WAS BENEFICIAL
TO PROVIDE INFORMATION TO THE
COMMITTEE TODAY TO LET YOU KNOW
THAT HEY, WE GET A LOT
OF COMPLAINTS AND A LOT OF THEM
HAVE TO DO WITH SPEED TO BREAK
DOWN OUR DATA FURTHER WE MINED
THE DATA FROM THE UTICA WHICH
IS A STATE CRASH REPORT ON THE
STATE CRASH REPORT.
THE OFFICER COMPLETING IT WILL
PROVIDE WHAT WE CALL INJURY
TYPE INJURY TYPES THE MORE
SEVERE THE MORE SERIOUS
INJURIES ARE THE MOST SERIOUS
INJURIES ARE OUR TYPE A LESS
SERIOUS AND WOULD INCLUDE THESE
THINGS YOU CAN YOU DON'T NEED
TO READ THEM TO YOU BUT
SIGNIFICANT INJURIES THAT WE'RE
LOOKING AT THESE PEOPLE ARE
GOING TO HAVE TO BE TRANSPORTED
TO HOSPITAL.
THERE'S SOMETHING LIFE CHANGING
THAT'S GOING TO HAPPEN IF
YOU'RE IN A INJURY.
OBVIOUSLY MORE SERIOUS THAN AN
INJURY WAS WHAT THEY
CATEGORIZED AS A TYPE K OR A
FATAL INJURY AND THEN LESS
SERIOUS IS A TYPE B AND THEN A
TYPE C SO A B IS A SUSPECTED
MINOR INJURY THAT YEAH, YOU'VE
GOT AN APPARENT OR A AN INJURY
MAYBE IT'S A LACERATION, MAYBE
IT'S A BRUISE, MAYBE IT'S A CUT
BUT NO MAJOR TISSUE DAMAGE,
NOTHING THAT LOOKS LIKE THIS IS
A THIS IS A BAD INJURY AND THEN
YOU'VE GOT A C OR A COMPLAINT
COMPLAIN OF PAIN SO THAT'S HOW
THE INJURIES ARE CATEGORIZED.
SO AGAIN GOING BACK TO OUR OUR
TRAFFIC SAFETY PLAN, ALL THE
ONES THAT WE'VE IDENTIFIED ARE
EITHER FATAL OR A CRASH.
SO WE HAVE THE MAPS WILL SHOW A
LITTLE BIT FURTHER DOWN THERE.
BUT SO THIS IS NOW IN OUR IN
OUR LAST FIVE YEARS OF COURSE
WHERE WE'RE SHOWING SIX YEARS
NOW WE'RE IN TWENTY TWENTY FOUR
BUT WE'RE AVERAGING SIX ISH TO
FATALS TWO TO THREE FATALS PER
YEAR AND WE'RE NOT VEERING TOO
MUCH FROM THAT ALTHOUGH TWENTY
ONE WAS WE HAD TWENTY ONE IN
FIVE BATTLES WITH FOUR AND
TWENTY TWENTY THREE AND WE HAVE
THREE ALREADY THIS YEAR SO
WE'RE NOT CHANGING TOO MUCH
YEAR TO YEAR WE CAN SEE OUR
CALL IT AVERAGES BASED ON YEAR
TO YEAR OUR OUR CRASHES SO
WE'RE KIND OF LOW LEVELING OUT
SO WE'RE ENACTING THIS PLAN IN
ORDER TO TRY TO ADDRESS THESE
CONCERNS AND GET THOSE NUMBERS
DOWN TO WHERE WE WANT THEM TO
BE WHICH ZERO OF THOSE SERIOUS
INJURIES WE'VE HAD IS YOU CAN
SEE JUST OVER A THIRD OR
VEHICLE VERSUS VEHICLE HALF OR
A VEHICLE AND PED AND THEN
SINGLE VEHICLE IS ABOUT FIFTEEN
PERCENT
OF THE ANALYSIS ALSO
INCLUDED DAYS IN TIMES THAT WE
WERE OCCURRING AND WE DON'T SEE
IF YOU LOOK AT THE THE DAYS
OF THE WEEK WE SEE SLIGHTLY
MORE ON FRIDAYS AND SATURDAYS
FOR SERIOUS INJURIES BUT WE ARE
PRETTY CLOSE ON MONDAY,
WEDNESDAY, THURSDAY WITH
TUESDAY FOR WHATEVER REASON
BEING LOWER AND THEN SUNDAY
BEING JUST A TOUCH HIGHER THAN
THAT.
SO IT'S A LITTLE MISLEADING
BECAUSE OUR NUMBERS ARE PRETTY
LOW BUT SIX PER DAY JUST ABOUT
ON ANY GIVEN DAY OF THE WEEK IS
ABOUT THE AVERAGE AND THAT IF
WE LOOK AT OUR OUR TIMES
OF OCCURRENCE, THE VAST
MAJORITY OF THEM ARE COMING
BETWEEN TWO P.M. AND 6:00 AM SO
AFTERNOON AND THEN OVERNIGHT
HOURS.
SO THERE'S A MAP OF OUR OUR
ACCIDENT INVESTIGATOR CALL
OUTS.
NOW IF YOU LOOK AT THE CLUSTERS
AND YOU'RE FAMILIAR WITH THE
CITY, YOU'LL NOTICE THAT IF YOU
CAN MOVE THE CURSOR OVER TO
LIKE THE WATERLAND LAND AREA
STARTING ON WASHTENAW.
>> SO IF YOU START IN THERE AND
WE FOLLOW INBOUND, WE CAN SEE
THERE'S A CLUSTER AND THEN WE
TAKE LOSH INBOUND AND WE
CONTINUE NOW WE'RE GOING TO
TURN AND MAKE A LEFT HERE AND
MAKE A TURN INTO HERE ON THREE
HEAD OUT HERE ON WE GO ON TO
JACKSON ONCE WITH A SPLIT AND
NOW WE HAVE ANOTHER BIG CLUSTER
OUT HERE BUTLER BY WEBERS SO
THAT WAS IDENTIFIED THROUGH
THERE.
AND THEN IF YOU GO DOWN OUR
SECOND BIG CLUSTER THAT SETS
TWO OF OUR CORRIDORS AND THEN
OUR THIRD CORRIDORS DOWN PACARD
AND YOU HAVE A CLUSTER CLOSER
TO DOWNTOWN AND THEN A SECOND
CLUSTER
HEADING OUT OF TOWN
ALMOST BETWEEN FLAT AND THE
HIGHWAY THERE.
SO IT WAS IT WAS APPARENT TO US
WHEN WE STARTED PLOTTING THESE
WHAT OUR LOCATIONS NEED TO BE
WHERE OUR FOCUS NEEDED TO BE
AND THAT'S WHY THAT'S HOW WE
DEVELOPED OUR CORE LOCATIONS
BASED THESE SERIES CALL OUTS.
SO WE DEVELOPED THESE CALL UP
CORRIDORS WHICH ARE GOING TO BE
OUR SAFETY CORRIDORS.
>> WE'VE WASHTENAW BETWEEN
GETTINGS AND GARUM PARKWAY
WHERE WE HAD SIX PACARD FROM
FIFTH AT TURNBERRY WHERE WE
ALSO HAD SIX AND THEN JACKSON
FROM BIRDWOOD AT GRAYSLAKE WE
HAD FIVE CALL OUTS SO YES, YES,
THE MAP SHOWS CALL OUTS IN
OTHER AREAS BUT THOSE ARE THE
CLUSTERS WHERE OUR FOCUSED
EFFORTS ARE GOING TO BE.
AND AGAIN, AS I MENTIONED
EARLIER, IF YOU LOOK AT OUR TWO
GREATEST CAUSES IN OUR FATELE
AND EIGHT TYPE INJURY CRASHES,
WE'VE GOT SPEED TOO FAST AND
FAILED TO YIELD.
>> SO THOSE TWO ARE BY FAR OUR
GREATEST HAZARDS VIOLATIONS
WITH SLIGHTLY LOWER IN OUR
DISREGARDING AIR TRAFFIC
CONTROL DEVICES.
OUR THIRD THERE'S SOME OTHER
MISCELLANEOUS ONES THERE TOO.
SO AGAIN WE'RE LOOKING AT TO
PASS IN OUR OUR OUR BUILDING
YIELD AS OUR VIOLATIONS FOCUS
VIOLATION IF YOU WANT TO CALL
IN THAT
OUR SCREEN THERE.
>> YEAH, OK, SO WE'RE
TRANSITIONING FROM OUR AP
REVIEW.
THANK YOU LIEUTENANT SCHERBA
AND WE'RE GOING TO LOOK AT SOME
OF THE TRADITIONAL THINGS THAT
WE HAVE SHARED PREVIOUSLY WITH
TRANSPORTATION.
AND IF YOU WILL GIVE ME JUST A
QUICK MOMENT TO ADJUST MY
SCREEN BECAUSE THE ZOOM
CONFERENCING KIND OF CAME UP
AND STOLE MY SCREEN THERE FOR A
SECOND ARE RADIO FOR THOSE
OF YOU WHO HAVE BEEN ON THE
TRANSPORTATION IN MORE YEARS
THAN THIS, HAVE PROBABLY
ALREADY SEEN THIS AND YOU MAY
HAVE JUST USED US AS A RESIDENT
WE HAVE ALL OF OUR OUR
INFORMATION AVAILABLE ON OUR
WEBSITE FOR OUR CRASHES AND IT
IS THROUGH OUR CRASH REPORTING
DASHBOARD AND WHAT WE JUST
WANTED TO GO THROUGH IS OUR
GENERAL SORRY IT'S A LITTLE BIT
MANAGING EVERYTHING ON A LAPTOP
IS A LITTLE BIT DIFFERENT THAN
USING MY DUAL SCREENS.
SO PLEASE BEAR WITH ME JUST A
LITTLE BIT.
WE WANTED TO GIVE A GENERAL
OVERVIEW OF THE CRASHES AND THE
CRASH PATTERNS AS THEY HAVE
DEVELOPED IN TWENTY TWENTY
THREE AND COMPARED TO YEARS
PAST.
SO AS WE CAN SEE LAST YEAR WE
HAVE ENJOYED THIS A DECLINE IN
CRASHES DURING THE PANDEMIC IN
TWENTY TWENTY AND SINCE THEN WE
HAVE SEEN AN INCREASE
OF OVERALL CRASHES IN THE LAST
THREE YEARS WE ARE STILL AT A
CRASH LEVEL THAT IS LESS AND
THAN WE WERE PRE PANDEMIC SO WE
DO STILL HAVE AN OVERALL
DIMINISHMENT IN THE NUMBER
OF CRASHES THAT WE ARE SEEING
AND I'M GOING TO GO THROUGH
EVERYTHING WITH ALL OF OUR
CRASHES WHICH WILL INCLUDE ALL
OF OUR PROPERTY DAMAGE, ONLY
POSSIBLE INJURY NON
INCAPACITATING, INCAPACITATING
AND FATALITY AND THEN I'LL COME
BACK THROUGH AND LOOK AT THOSE
SEVERE CRASHES LATER.
SO LOOKING AT OUR CRASH TYPES,
WE'RE STILL SEEING AN OVERALL
TREND TOWARDS THOSE REAR END
STRAIGHT CRASHES TOWARDS OUR
SIDESWIPES, SAME CRASHES AND
WITH OUR ANGLE TYPE CRASHES
THOSE ANGLE CRASHES IN THOSE
REAR END CRASHES DO TEND TO BE
ASSOCIATED WITH INTERSECT ZONES
AND THEY DO TIE IN TO THE
BEHAVIORS THAT HAVE ALREADY
BEEN EXPRESSED BY LIEUTENANT
SCHERBA.
SO THEN WHEN WE LOOK AT OUR
TEMPORAL WE CAN SEE THAT WE ARE
HOW WE HAVE SIMILAR TRENDS FOR
OUR OVERALL CRASHES AS THOSE
DISCUSSED BY LIEUTENANT
SCHERBA, WE HAVE A PRETTY EVEN
DISTRIBUTION OF CRASHES ACROSS
THE WITH A HIGHER OCCURRENCE ON
FRIDAYS WHEN YOU LOOK AT OUR
FIVE YEAR AVERAGES PER MONTH,
OCTOBER CONTINUES TO BE THE
MONTH THAT WE HAVE THE MOST
CRASHES.
AND WHEN YOU LOOK AT THAT DAILY
DISTRIBUTION WE'RE DEFINITELY
SEE CONTINUING TO SEE THAT
PEAKING THAT OCCURS AROUND THE
PMP WE ARE ALSO WHEN YOU LOOK
AT LIGHTING CONDITIONS, THE
VAST MAJORITY OF OUR CRASHES
CONTINUE TO BE DURING DAYLIGHT
HOURS AND WE ARE CONTINUING TO
HAVE THE VAST MAJORITY OF OUR
CRASHES DURING CLEAR WEATHER
CONDITIONS.
I DO WANT TO POINT OUT ON OUR
VIOLATIONS TAB WE HAVE A NEW
CHART I NEED TO CHECK IN WITH
OUR DATA TEAM IN IT BECAUSE I
FEEL LIKE THERE'S I'M NOT QUITE
SURE WHAT'S GOING ON WITH THIS
CRUSHES BY VIOLATION CHARGE
BECAUSE IT I JUST IT LOOKS
WEIRD.
I DON'T KNOW WHAT'S GOING ON.
WE WILL GET THAT FIXED BUT ONE
THING THAT OUR TEAM DID
INCORPORATE FOR US THIS YEAR
WAS BRINGING BACK THIS GRAPH
THAT SHOWS US WHAT THE FIVE
YEAR PERCENTAGE FOR DIFFERENT
TYPES OF VIOLATIONS ARE AND YOU
CAN APPLY ALL OF THE FILTERS
OVER HERE THAT ARE NORMALLY
AVAILABLE TO YOU AND THIS CHART
WILL UPDATE AND WE'LL SHOW THE
PERCENTAGE OF THE THINGS THAT
YOU HAVE SELECTED.
BUT AS LIEUTENANT SCHERBA SAID
,WE ARE STILL SEEING FAILURE
TO YIELD AS BEING OUR FAILURE
TO YIELD FAILURE TO STOP AND
ENSURE FAIR DISTANCE.
THOSE ARE OUR TOP TYPES
OF VIOLATIONS AND THEN WE ARE
LOOKING AT YOU SOME OF THESE
OTHER THINGS SUCH AS CARELESS
DRIVING, DISOBEY TRAFFIC
CONTROL DEVICE AND SPEED TOO
FAST SO GOING BACK TO OUR
OVERALL CRASH TRENDS WHEN WE
LIMIT OUR CRASHES DOWN TO OUR
FATAL CRASHES AND OUR
INCAPACITATING INJURY CRASHES
SO THOSE ARE GREAT CRASHES AND
OUR LEVEL CRASHES THAT WE HAVE
HISTORICALLY LOOKED AT AS BEING
THE MOST SEVERE WITH THE VISION
ZERO PLAN YOU CAN SEE THAT WE
DO HAVE AN UPTICK IN CRASHES
PARTICULARLY IN OUR LEVEL
CRASHES THIS YEAR AND WE'RE
STILL HAVING OVERREPRESENT
ATION OF PEDESTRIANS FOLLOWED
SECONDLY BY BICYCLES AND THEN
LOOKING AT THOSE ANGLE AND THEN
THOSE REAR END STRAIGHT CRASHES
GIVEN THAT WE DID HAVE THIS
UPTICK IN THESE OLIVAL CRASHES
THIS YEAR WE PULLED A
MULTIDISCIPLINARY TEAM TOGETHER
AND REALLY STARTED LOOKING AT
ALL OF THOSE CRASHES IN DEPTH
AN IN-DEPTH REVIEW OF EVERY
SINGLE CRASH TO TRY TO GET A
BETTER SENSE OF WHAT WAS GOING
ON WITH THAT CRASH TREND.
>> I MEAN I WANT TO POINT OUT
THAT WHEN WE TAKE THOSE HIGH
LEVEL CRASHES OUT AND WE LOOK
AT JUST OUR FATAL CRASHES, WE
ARE STILL YOU KNOW, WE HAD
THREE LAST YEAR, THREE STILL
TOO MANY.
BUT OUR PATTERN IS A LITTLE BIT
MORE STABLE WHEN YOU'RE LOOKING
AT OUR FIVE YEAR AVERAGE.
SO WE'RE STILL RUNNING BETWEEN
TWO TO THREE CRASHES ON AVERAGE
AND WE WERE REALLY INTERESTED
IN WHAT WAS GOING ON WITH THOSE
LEVEL CRASHES BECAUSE AS WE
WERE GETTING INTO THEM AND NOT
ALL OF THEM SEEMED LIKE THEY
WERE TRULY LIFE THREATENING
CRASHES AND THAT'S WHERE WE
STARTED WORKING VERY CLOSELY
WITH THE POLICE DEPARTMENT AND
GETTING AN UNDERSTANDING FOR
WHAT THAT A LEVEL DESIGNATION
IS AND WHAT THAT MEANS FOR OUR
CRASH ANALYSIS AND HOW WE NEED
TO START DIFFERENTIATING
BETWEEN THE CRASHES WHERE THE
INJURIES ARE SEVERE ENOUGH THAT
THEY ARE CALLED OUT FOR THAT
HIGHER LEVEL INVESTIGATION AND
THE REST OF THE LEVEL CRASHES.
>> SO I'M GOING TO STOP SHARING
THAT AND THEN WE CAN MOVE BACK
INTO OUR SLIDE DECK
OR WE'RE
DOING THAT.
ARE THERE ANY QUESTIONS THAT
PEOPLE CAN ASK AND WHAT WE'VE
SEEN SO FAR I WOULD SAY JUST
YOU KNOW, RAISE YOUR HAND AT
ANY POINT IF YOU HAVE QUESTIONS
ON SPECIFICS LEADS.
>> PETER, I GUESS I DO HAVE A
QUESTION.
THE CATEGORIZATION THAT WE SAW
WHERE WE HAD LIKE ANGLED CRASH,
STRAIGHT CRASH PEDESTRIAN CRASH
,BICYCLE CRASH CAN ANY
OF THOSE THINGS BE MORE THAN
ONE?
CAN IT CAN THEY BE MORE THAN
I MEAN CAN THEY BE A FAILURE TO
ONE?
YIELD AND PEDESTRIAN CRASH LIKE
I MEAN CAN THEY BE A FAILURE TO
I'M I MEAN IT SEEMS LIKE A
YIELD AND PEDESTRIAN CRASH LIKE
DESIGNATION OF WHO WAS INVOLVED
I'M I MEAN IT SEEMS LIKE A
NOT LIKE THE THE CIRCUMSTANCE
DESIGNATION OF WHO WAS INVOLVED
OF THE CRASH IF THAT MAKES
NOT LIKE THE THE CIRCUMSTANCE
SENSE.
OF THE CRASH IF THAT MAKES
>> SO ALL OF THIS INFORMATION
SENSE.
IS COMING FROM THE ADDITON
>> SO ALL OF THIS INFORMATION
WHICH IS THE THE STATE CRASH
IS COMING FROM THE ADDITON
REPORTING FOR AND WHEN THE
WHICH IS THE THE STATE CRASH
OFFICERS ARE OUT, ONE OF THE
REPORTING FOR AND WHEN THE
ITEMS THAT THEY ARE ASKED TO
OFFICERS ARE OUT, ONE OF THE
SUPPLY INFORMATION ON IS THE
ITEMS THAT THEY ARE ASKED TO
CRASH TYPE.
SUPPLY INFORMATION ON IS THE
>> SO THAT IS WHETHER IT'S AN
CRASH TYPE.
ANGLE CRASH OR A REAR END CRASH
>> SO THAT IS WHETHER IT'S AN
.
ANGLE CRASH OR A REAR END CRASH
PEDESTRIAN CRASHES ARE ALSO
.
CATEGORIZED QUITE OFTEN AS A
PEDESTRIAN CRASHES ARE ALSO
SINGLE VEHICLE CRASH BECAUSE
CATEGORIZED QUITE OFTEN AS A
ONLY ONE VEHICLE WAS ONE.
SINGLE VEHICLE CRASH BECAUSE
ONLY ONE VEHICLE WAS INCLUDED
ONLY ONE VEHICLE WAS ONE.
IN THE CRASH AND THAT'S TRUE
ONLY ONE VEHICLE WAS INCLUDED
WITH BICYCLE AND CRASHES AS
IN THE CRASH AND THAT'S TRUE
WELL.
WITH BICYCLE AND CRASHES AS
>> SO YES, THEY CAN BE BOTH
WELL.
OF THOSE THINGS BUT VIOLATIONS
>> SO YES, THEY CAN BE BOTH
IS A SEPARATE PART OF THAT FORM
OF THOSE THINGS BUT VIOLATIONS
.
IS A SEPARATE PART OF THAT FORM
SO THERE'S A LOT OF INFORMATION
.
THAT IS AVAILABLE ON THAT FORM
SO THERE'S A LOT OF INFORMATION
AND THOSE ARE JUST TWO EXAMPLES
THAT IS AVAILABLE ON THAT FORM
OF THE INFORMATION THAT IS
AND THOSE ARE JUST TWO EXAMPLES
AVAILABLE.
OF THE INFORMATION THAT IS
>> SO BE THAT LISTED THE
AVAILABLE.
HAZARDS VIOLATIONS TYPICALLY.
>> SO BE THAT LISTED THE
AND SO WHEN YOU SAW SOMETHING
HAZARDS VIOLATIONS TYPICALLY.
LIKE BUILD A STOP
TO SHORT
CLEAR DISTANCE, THAT'S ACTUALLY
A SPEED RELATED VIOLATION.
SO THAT WOULD BE INCLUDED AS
FAR AS THE PD IS CONCERNED.
>> I WOULD BE INCLUDED IN OUR
SPEED FOR A CAUSE NOW SOMETIMES
YOU'LL SEE IT CAUSE OR YOU'LL
SEE A OF VIOLATION BY BOTH
PARTIES MAYBE ONE FAILED TO
YIELD AND ONE FAILED TO STOP OR
ONE ONE OR BOTH BOTH UNITS
INVOLVED HAD SOME KIND
OF VIOLATION.
TYPICALLY IT'S ONE ONE PARTY
WHO HAS THE MORE EGREGIOUS
HAZARD WHICH MAKE THE ASPHALT
AND THEN THE SECOND MOST
CONTRIBUTING.
BUT THAT'S WHY SOMETIMES YOU
SEE TO ANSWER YOUR QUESTION
YES, YOU CAN SEE MULTIPLE
HAZARDS VIOLATIONS ON A SINGLE
CRASH ON THE BIG THE BIG DATA
SET YOU'LL SEE THAT THE
MAJORITY OR THE THE MOST COMMON
HAZARDS VIOLATION IS GOING TO
SAY NONE BECAUSE A LOT OF TIMES
YOU'LL HAVE ONE UNIT HAS A
HOUSE VIOLATION AND THEN THE
SECOND UNIT HAS NONE.
SO THERE'S ENOUGH CRASHES THAT
ARE IN THE SYSTEM WHERE YOU
HAVE THAT THAT COMBINATION THAT
NONE IS THE MOST POPULAR HAS
VIOLATION BECAUSE YOU HAVE THAT
ONE CALLED A VICTIM CAR THAT
GETS STRUCK BY SOMEONE WHO
COMMITTED THAT HAZARDS
VIOLATION THEN ANSWER THE
QUESTION.
>> I THINK SO I MAY FOLLOW UP
IN AN EMAIL AFTER I LOOK AT
THIS MORNING.
>> THANK YOU.
OK, THANKS.
OK, SO LOOKING AT THIS SLIDE,
THE SLIDE IS SHOWING US A IT'S
A TABLE THAT JUST INCLUDES THE
OVERALL INFORMATION THAT WE
JUST LOOKED AT THE SLIDES AND
THE TABULAR FORMAT WITH INJURY
TYPE PER YEAR BREAKING THOSE
DOWN OUR NEXT SLIDE IS A TABLE
THAT JUST LOOKS AT OUR FATALS
AND OUR INCAPACITATING
INJURIES.
SO ONCE AGAIN THAT'S THE SAME
INFORMATION THAT'S AVAILABLE ON
OUR WEBSITE AND THIS IS A MORE
GRAPHICAL REPRESENTATION
OF THAT INFORMATION THOSE U.D.
TEN FATALS COMPARED TO THE
CRASH INVESTIGATION CARLILE'S
SO WE HAVE A BAR GRAPH HERE
THAT HAS DATA FOR TWENTY
NINETEEN THROUGH TWENTY TWENTY
FOUR AND IT'S SHOWING WHERE WE
HAVE NOW HOW THOSE TWO ARE
LINING UP AND THAT WE HAVE TO
CRUSHING INVESTIGATION FAILED
IN TWENTY NINETEEN BUT WE HAD
THREE U.D. TEN FATALS.
>> IT MAY BE THAT I'M ACTUALLY
NOT SURE OF THAT DISCREPANCY IN
THAT YEAR IS IN TWENTY TWENTY
WE SHOW THAT WE HAVE THE SAME
IN 2021 WE HAVE FIVE CALL-OUT
INVESTIGATIONS BUT WE ONLY HAVE
FOUR U.D. TEN FATALITIES.
IF I AM RECALLING MY DATA
CORRECTLY THIS THIS IS ONE
OF THOSE INSTANCES WHERE THE
U.D. 10 DOES NOT GET ADJUSTED
AFTER THIRTY DAYS.
>> SO IF SOMEONE DOES PERISH
DUE TO THEIR INJURIES AFTER
THIRTY DAYS THE 10 DOES NOT GET
UPDATED TO REFLECT A FATALITY.
IT RAISES AN A LEVEL INJURY IN
TWENTY TWENTY TWO WE HAVE ONE
FATALITY AND ONE FATALITY IN
TWENTY TWENTY THREE.
WE ALSO HAVE THAT DISCREPANCY
BETWEEN THE CALL-OUT FATALITIES
AND THE UDY 10 FATALITIES AND
IT'S PROBABLY THAT SAME THAT SO
WE HAVE TWENTY TWENTY FOUR.
OKAY YEAH.
JUST SO I JUST WANT TO ADD SOME
CONTEXT.
>> THE REASON FOR THE
DISCREPANCY IS THAT SOME
OF THESE CRASHES ARE LOCATED
OUTSIDE THE RIGHT WAY SO THEN
THE DUTY TENDS THAT WE WOULD
HAVE PULLED TO REVIEW THOSE
CRASHES WOULD NOT HAVE BEEN IN
THE DATA SET THAT WE
INVESTIGATED VERSUS THE CRASH
INVESTIGATIONS THAT AP DO ARE
ALL OF THOSE FATAL CRASHES.
SO I JUST WANTED TO PROVIDE A
LITTLE CONTEXT TO THAT.
THANK YOU.
MY APOLOGIES TO EVERYONE I
THOUGHT WE HAD PULLED SO A CALL
OUT THAT THE APD MIGHT BE ASKED
TO LOOK AT THAT WOULD NOT BE IN
OUR DATA SET COULD BE AN
INCIDENT INVOLVING THE TRAIN
TRACKS AND TRAIN RAILROAD RIGHT
OF WAY.
I APOLOGIZE.
I THOUGHT WE HAD PULLED THOSE
OUT OF THIS PARTICULAR DATA SET
SO THEN THIS WHAT THIS SLIDE
SHOWS US IT'S ANOTHER GRAPH
THAT IS SHOWING TWENTY NINETEEN
THROUGH TO TWENTY TWENTY THREE
COMPREHENSIVE DATA AND THEN
ALSO A LITTLE BIT OF DATA FROM
APD FOR TWENTY TWENTY FOUR WE
HAVE OUR CRASH INVESTIGATION
SERIOUS INJURY COMPARED TO OUR
U.D. TENZER IS INJURIES SO AS
YOU CAN SEE HERE WE HAVE IN
TWENTY NINETEEN WE HAVE FIVE
CALL OUTS THAT WERE SERIOUS
INJURIES COMPARED TO THE ALMOST
TWENTY FIVE CALL OUTS FOR OUR
DETENT OR SERIOUS INJURIES IN
OUR UNITARDS AND THAT REALLY
GOES BACK TO WHAT LIEUTENANT
SCHERBA TOUCHED ON EARLIER IS
WHAT THAT SEVERITY LEVEL REALLY
HOVERS.
AND SO IF SOMEONE HAS A BROKEN
BONE THAT IS IMPACTING THEIR
LIMB THEY ARE GOING TO BE
CATEGORIZED AS IN A LEVEL CRASH
AND THAT LEVEL INCLUDES
INJURIES UP TO INTERNAL ORGAN
DAMAGE, PARALYSIS, TRAUMATIC
BRAIN INJURIES.
SO WHAT WE FOUND IN THIS REALLY
DEEP DOVE IS THAT WE HAVE THIS
REALLY BROAD SPECTRUM
OF INJURIES THAT ARE COVERED IN
OUR ARE A LEVEL CRASH CRASHES
AND WE REALLY WANT TO AS WE'RE
MOVING FORWARD FIND A WAY TO
DIFFERENTIATE THE INVESTEE.
THE CALL-OUT INVESTIGATION
CRASHES THAT END UP BEING A
LEVEL AND THE REST OF THE LEVEL
CRASHES SO THAT WE ARE ALL
LOOKING AT THOSE MOST SEVERE
CRASHES TOGETHER.
>> SO WE GO AHEAD AND MOVE ON
TO OUR NEXT SLIDE.
>> THE SLIDE IS REALLY LOOKING
AT WHAT THOSE BEHAV OF YOURS
ARE THAT WE'RE FINDING IN THE
CRASH SITE AND THESE BEHAVIORS
REFLECT THE KEY BEHAVIORS IN
OUR TRANSPORTATION PLAN AND SO
THOSE ARE OUR FAILURE TO YIELD
WHICH IS OUR HIGHEST LEVEL AND
THAT IS SHOWING UP AT FIFTY ONE
PERCENT ARE IMPAIRED DRIVING IS
ELEVEN PERCENT.
SO THESE ARE ALL OF OUR FATAL
AND A LEVEL CRASHES PER THE
UNITARDS WE FIND THAT WE HAVE
SEVEN PERCENT RECKLESS DRIVING
,SEVEN PERCENT SPEEDING AND
THEN THREE PERCENT ARE
DISREGARDED TRAFFIC SIGNS OR
SIGNALS.
SO WE GO AHEAD AND MOVE AHEAD.
THIS IS A STATIC VERSION OF OUR
CRASH MAP.
THIS MAP IS AVAILABLE TO
EVERYONE THROUGH OUR CRASH
DASHBOARD AS WELL AND YOU CAN
SEE THAT WE DO HAVE THE THOSE
KEY LOCATIONS THAT WERE
IDENTIFIED BY APD IN THEIR DEEP
DRIVE OF THEIR DATA LOOKING AT
THEIR CALL OUTS AND WE HAVE
THOSE GROUPINGS AS WELL.
BUT THERE ARE ADDITIONAL
GROUPINGS BASED ON THE REST
OF THOSE ALLOWABLE CRASHES.
>> SO WE'RE MOVING ON AND THIS
NEXT SLIDE IS FOR LITANIES
SCHERBA
THE AND AIR SORRY THIS
WHAT THIS SHOWS IS A NATIONAL
NATIONAL DATA FOR THE LOOKS
LIKE SINCE TWENTY TWENTY ONE
FORTY TWO THOUSAND NINE HUNDRED
FIFTY PEOPLE HAVE DIED ON
AMERICA'S ROADS.
THE DATA SHOWING THAT DEATHS ON
THE ROADS HAVE DECLINED OVER
THE YEARS WHICH THEY PEAKED IN
NINETEEN SEVENTY TWO AND LOOKS
LIKE ABOUT TWENTY TEN WE WERE
AT A LOW AND THEN WE'RE
CLIMBING BACK NOW PARTICULARLY
SINCE TWENTY TWENTY THERE'S A
NUMBER OF REASONS FOR THAT.
I CAN TELL YOU FROM THE PD
STANDPOINT WHAT WE SAW IN
TWENTY TWENTY IS WITH THE
PANDEMIC AND THE LOCKDOWN AND
WE AS LAW ENFORCEMENT WERE LIKE
EVERYONE ELSE TRY TO TRYING TO
AVOID CONTACT WITH ANYBODY
ELSE.
SO I WON'T SAY WAS THE WILD
WEST OUT THERE BUT WE IN
ABSENTIA EGREGIOUS MAJOR
VIOLATION THAT WE DO WE JUST
WEREN'T DOING A LOT OF TRAFFIC
STOPS IN THAT TWENTY TWENTY
TWENTY OR TWENTY TWENTY ONE.
>> AND I THINK DRIVERS GOT TO
THE POINT WHERE THEY WERE
AGGRESSIVE AND SPEEDS WERE HIGH
AND WASN'T UNTIL WE STARTED
KIND REGAINING OUR PRESENCE AND
BACK TO BUSINESS AS USUAL WITH
OUR NORMAL ENFORCEMENT IN
CONTACT EFFORTS THAT IT'S
CURTAILING A LITTLE BIT.
BUT I THINK THAT THE THE SPIKE
THAT YOU SAW THERE IN TWENTY
TWENTY AND IN EARLY TWENTY ONE
IS EXACTLY THAT IS THAT THERE
JUST WASN'T THE POLICE ACT
ACTIVITIES YOU WANT TO SAY
MAKING CONTACT WITH THOSE
DRIVERS EXCEPT FOR THOSE YOU
KNOW THE EGREGIOUS SITUATION SO
AND I CAN PROBABLY SAY JUST
DRIVING BACK AND FORTH TO WORK
AT THE SPEEDS ON TWENTY THREE
NORTHBOUND I GOT TO THE POINT
WHERE LIKE MAN PEOPLE ARE
DRIVING EIGHTY 80 PLUS AS THE
NORM UP AND DOWN THE ROADWAY
WHEREAS A YEAR OR TWO PRIOR
THAT IT WAS MORE LIKE MID
SEVENTIES SO
I THINK THAT TREND
IS TURNING BACK
A LITTLE BIT
BUT I THINK THAT'S EXACTLY WHY
WE SAW THAT NOW THAT SPICA THAT
INCREASED DURING THAT DURING
THOSE LOCKED DOWN YEARS SOME
STATS FOR STATE OF MICHIGAN AND
I THINK HOPEFULLY THE ENDURING
FOLKS TELL US HOW WE'RE DOING
COMPARATIVELY IT JUST IT JUST
SHOWS THAT THERE'S THERE'S
STILL A LOT OF FATAL CRASHES
OUT THERE AND ALL THE DRIVE
DRIVE THE HIGHWAYS AND SEE ON
THE BOARD, YOU KNOW, TO DATE
THIS MANY PEOPLE HAVE DIED AND
IT GIVES A COMPARISON AGAINST
THE PREVIOUS YEAR AND IT SEEMS
TO STAY ABOUT THE SAME STATE
WIDE IT APPEARS.
BUT BUT THERE'S STILL A LOT
OF CRASHES OUT THERE.
GET A STATE THE STATE STATE
DATA SHOWING WE'RE SPEEDING OUR
SPEEDS TOO FAST.
WE'RE FAILING TO YIELD AGAIN AS
OUR STATEWIDE THAT'S CONSISTENT
WITH WHAT WE'RE SEEING LOCALLY
AS WELL FOR OUR HAZARDS ACTIONS
AND THERE'S THAT IF YOU LOOK AT
THAT CHART THERE IS THAT NONE
THAT I MENTIONED BEFORE?
WELL, THERE'S NO HAZARDOUS
ACTION.
WHY IS THAT A CRASH?
WELL, THAT'S THE PERSON THAT
GOT HIT TYPICALLY.
>> SO THAT'S WHY THAT'S SHOWING
SUCH A HIGH NUMBER OF COMPARED
TO EVERYTHING ELSE.
I'LL JUMP BACK IN FOR A MINUTE
AND I THINK IT'S REALLY
IMPORTANT FOR US TO PAUSE FOR A
MOMENT AND THINK ABOUT WHERE IS
VISION ZERO WORKING?
YOU KNOW, THIS IS A QUESTION
THAT WE REALLY ASK OURSELVES A
LOT AND BEING IN DENVER RIGHT
NOW AT A PEER EXCHANGE WITH
CITIES ACROSS THE UNITED STATES
FROM ORLANDO TO MINNEAPOLIS,
PORTLAND, SAN JOSE, L.A.,
DENVER WE'RE ALL SEEING THE
SAME ISSUES AND THE CHART THAT
I HAVE IS PULLED FROM A PUBLIC
SOURCE.
YOU KNOW, WE'RE ALL STILL
HOVERING AROUND ZERO NUMBERS
AND IT'S REALLY CLEAR AND I
FOUND A WONDERFUL QUOTE FROM
BLOOMBERG THAT IT'S NOT AN
EXAGGERATION THAT BEHAVIOR ON
THE ROADS IS PRETTY BAD.
WE'RE SEEING THAT BEHAVIOR NOT
ONLY AT A NATIONAL LEVEL, WE'RE
SEEING IT AT A STATE LEVEL.
WE HAD APD DISCUSS SOME
OF THOSE KEY BEHAVIORS.
CYNTHIA ALSO PROVIDED THAT
THERE'S A CONSISTENT THERE
BECAUSE THAT IS ONE OF THE
ISSUES THAT WE'RE ALL REALLY
SEEKING TO ADDRESS AND IS WE'RE
REALLY LOOKING AT VISION ZERO
COLLECT WITH ALL OF THOSE OES
YOU KNOW, ENGINEERING ALONE
WILL NOT SOLVE THIS PD AND
ENFORCEMENT ALONE.
WE REALLY NEED TO LOOK AT THIS
AS A VAST PARADIGM SHIFT TO
VISION ZERO AND SHIFTING TO THE
MENTALITY AND THE CONVERSATIONS
THAT WE'RE HAVING AROUND THIS
SUBJECT
AND SO WE WANTED TO
TALK A LITTLE BIT ABOUT SOME
OF THE ENGINEERING SOLUTIONS
THAT WE HAVE ALREADY BEEN
IMPLEMENTED EVEN THOUGH THESE
ARE NOT THE SOLUTIONS ALONE
THAT ARE GOING TO GET US
DIVISION ZERO.
>> WE HAVE BEEN IMPLEMENTING
PROVEN SAFETY COUNTERMEASURES
IN OUR PROJECTS FOR A NUMBER
OF YEARS AND IT'S BEEN
PARTICULARLY INTERESTING BEING
HERE AT THIS PEER TO PEER
EXCHANGE ESPECIALLY TODAY.
AND ONE OF THE BIG TOPICS WE
WERE DISCUSSING THIS MORNING
WAS TO DISCUSS TRAFFIC SIGNAL
TIMING AND HOW TRAFFIC SIGNAL
TIMING CAN BE THIS KIND OF A
LOW HANGING FRUIT TO CHANGING
THE WAY EVERYONE IS INTERACTING
WITH AN INTERSECTION AND
IMPROVING SAFETY.
AND THERE WAS A LOT
OF DISCUSSION ABOUT LEADING
PEDESTRIAN INTERVALS AND THAT
IS PART OF SIGNAL TIMING THAT
GIVES A PEDESTRIAN A WALK THAT
IS IN ADVANCE OF THE VEHICLE
GREEN SO WE CAN GET THEM OUT
INTO THE INTERSECTION IN MORE
VISIBLE BEFORE THEY ARE THEY
HAVE CONFLICT POTENTIAL
CONFLICT WITH A RETURNING
VEHICLE AND EVERYONE WAS REALLY
DISCUSSING HOW DO YOU
PRIORITIZE DOING THIS?
>> AND SUZANNE AND I WERE
SITTING THERE GOING BUT WE DID
THAT IN 2020 EVERYWHERE AND WE
FOUND THAT WE'VE HAD A LITTLE
BIT OF TWEAKING THAT WE'VE HAD
TO DO AND WE'VE HAD SOME
CHANGES THAT WE'VE HAD TO MAKE
LOOK PRESENTED EARLIER ON THE
NEWEST INTERSECTION TO HAVE
BOTH PEDESTRIAN ACTIVATION AND
LEADING PEDESTRIAN INTERVALS
AND PROTECT THE PERMISSIVE
SIGNAL FAZING FOR LEFT TURNS
THAT ALLOWS US TO HOLD THOSE
LEFT TURNS AND CREATE THAT
PROTECTED SPACE FOR PEDESTRIANS
WHO ARE CROSSING AT LEAST FROM
THAT LEFT TURN CONFLICT.
>> AND SO IT WAS REALLY
INTERESTING TO WATCH ALL
OF THESE CITIES HAVING THESE
CONVERSATIONS AND KNOWING THAT
WE WERE IN A LITTLE BIT OF A
DIFFERENT SPACE AS FAR AS THAT
GOES, YOU KNOW, SOME OF THE
OTHER THINGS THAT WE ARE DOING
ROUTINELY IS WE ARE DESIGNING
OUR CROSSWALKS WHEN WE HAD OUR
CROSSWALK DESIGN EFFORT SEVERAL
YEARS AGO, ONE OF THE THINGS
THAT CAME UP FROM THE PUBLIC
REPEATEDLY WAS THAT WE REALLY
WANTED TO DESIGN APPLE.
>> WE HAVE THAT OPPORTUNITY SO
TO CHOOSE A MORE CONSERVATIVE
DESIGN MEANING A HIGHER LEVEL
DESIGN WHENEVER WE CAN SOCIETY
WHICH IS ONE OF THOSE AREAS
WHERE WE DESIGN UP EVEN ABOVE
WHAT OUR CROSSWALK DESIGN PLANS
CALL FOR TO CREATE THAT MORE
COMFORTABLE SPACE AND ALSO
REALLOCATING THE AMOUNT
OF PAVEMENT WE HAD AVAILABLE TO
REALLY VISUALLY NARROW THAT
SPACE.
>> AND ERHART IS ANOTHER
EXAMPLE WHERE WE IMPLEMENTED A
SERIES OF ROUNDABOUTS TO BRING
SPEEDS THE CORRIDOR DOWN AND
REALLY CONTROL THOSE CRASHED
ANIMATICS AND MAKE THAT
ENVIRONMENT MORE COMFORTABLE
FOR PEOPLE CROSSING THE ROAD
WHICH IS SOMETHING THAT WE
HEARD A LOT DURING OUR PUBLIC
ENGAGEMENT ON OUR PARTICULAR
PROJECT.
>> SO WE ARE CONTINUING TO DO
THE WORK THAT WE'VE BEEN DOING.
WE'RE CONTINUING TO IMPLEMENT
THESE KNOWN SAFETY
COUNTERMEASURES EVEN WHEN WE
DON'T HAVE THE CRASHES RIGHT.
BOTH OF THESE CORRIDORS REALLY
REPRESENT LOCATIONS WHERE WE
DIDN'T HAVE CRASH DATA THAT
SAID YOU MUST DO THIS BUT WE
WERE BEING PROACTIVE IN
INSTALLING DIFFERENT TYPES
OF TREATMENTS TO BRING THOSE
SPEEDS DOWN AND TO BRING THOSE
JUST PROJECTS IN CORRIDORS INTO
A MORE COMFORTABLE SPACE.
SO THAT'S SOMETHING THAT WE'RE
GOING TO CONTINUE TO DO.
THE THING THAT IS REALLY
IMPORTANT ABOUT THAT IS THAT AS
WE'RE LOOKING AT OUR CRASH
DATA, WE DON'T HAVE CRASHES
THAT ARE POINTING TO A
PARTICULAR CRASH ENGINEERING
SOLUTION FOR ALL OF THE CRASHES
LIKE OUR OF OUR MOST SERIOUS
CRASHES, WE DON'T HAVE
CONSISTENT PATTERNS THAT ARE
REALLY POINTING TO SPECIFIC
ENGINEERING SOLUTIONS.
SO THE IMPORTANCE IS THAT WE
NEED TO PARTNER WITH OUR OTHER
AREAS OF SAFE SYSTEMS TO START
MAKING THE NEXT STEP IN
PROGRESS.
SO TURNING IT BACK OVER TO
LIEUTENANT SCHERBA THANKS TO
THE CONTINUE ON OUR ON OUR AIR
TRAFFIC SAFETY PLAN, THE
QUARTERS THAT I MENTIONED WE
CURRENTLY HAVE ACTUALLY ONLY
TWO PERMANENT TRAFFIC OFFICERS
THAT'S OFFICER KELSO AND
OFFICER GILBY OFFICER WELLS IS
ON LOAN FROM PATROL.
SO WE HAVE THREE OFFICERS
ASSIGNED TO TRAFFIC RIGHT NOW
BUT ONLY TO PERMANENTLY.
EACH ONE OF THEM IS GOING TO BE
MANAGING ONE OF OUR CORRIDORS.
>> AND AGAIN, WHAT THIS QUARTER
IS GOING TO LOOK LIKE IS THE
WHAT I DESCRIBED BEFORE FROM
THE STARTING AND STOPPING
POINTS THERE WILL BE SIGNAGE WE
HAVEN'T FINALIZED THE LANGUAGE
WE WANT ON THE SIGNAGE AND
WE'RE CERTAINLY OPEN TO THE
TRANSPORTATION COMMISSION'S
INPUT ON WHAT COULD BE BEST PUT
ON THE SIGNAGE.
I KNOW FOR SURE THAT CHIEF
ANDERSON DOES NOT WANT ANYTHING
TO THE EFFECT OF ZERO AND ZERO
TOLERANCE ANYTHING LIKE THAT
COULD IT'S NOT A CAMPAIGN TO
HAMMER PEOPLE WITH TICKETS.
IT'S NOT AN ENFORCEMENT
CAMPAIGN.
IT'S IT'S A TOTAL CIRCUMSTANCES
.
THERE'S AN OFFICER GILBERTE,
OFFICER KELSO THOSE ARE TWO
FULL TIME TRAFFIC OFFICERS
RIGHT NOW.
>> SO THESE CORRIDORS IN ARE
GOING TO HAVE A VARIETY
OF MITIGATION STRATEGIES.
ONE OF THEM'S GOING TO BE
INCREASED OFFICER PRESENCE.
WE SEE HIM THERE WITH THERE
WITH A GREATER RADAR SIGNING
I'M SURE YOU'VE SEEN AROUND THE
CITY THAT SHOWS ARE SPEEDS AND
THAT DATA IS IT'S CAPTURABLE.
IT'S CAPTURED AND THEN IT'S WE
CAN SAY OK WITH THE AVERAGE
SPEED IS THIS MUCH FASTER
SPEEDS ARE THIS MUCH ON THE
SPEED AND THEN WE CAN USE THOSE
FOR OUR EDUCATION CAMPAIGNS.
WE'RE GOING TO WORK WITH CITY
COMMUNICATIONS AND WITHIN OUR
OWN DEPARTMENT FOR
COMMUNICATIONS TO MAKE PEOPLE
AWARE THAT SAFETY CORRIDORS ARE
GOING TO BE PUT IN PLACE AND
THEN ENCOURAGE THAT BEHAVIOR.
THE INCREASED OFFICER PRESENCE
AND INCREASE IN WHAT SENSE?
ENFORCEMENT DOESN'T NECESSARILY
MEAN CITATIONS BUT IT DOES MEAN
INCREASED STOPS.
IT COULD MEAN THAT THEY RECEIVE
A AN INFORMATION HANDOUT THAT
SAYS HEY YOU BETTER THE SAFETY
CORRIDOR.
WE HAVE HAD SIX CALL OUTS HERE
MAJOR CRASHES OVER THE LAST
FIVE YEARS THAT RESULTED IN
THIS MANY GUESTS.
THIS IS A VIOLATION THAT YOU
WERE SUPPOSED TO DO AN GETS A
WARNING BUT THE INFORMATION
THAT WE'RE GOING TO PROVIDE
THEM IN LIEU OF A TICKET, SOME
PEOPLE WILL GET A CITATION AS
WELL.
BUT AGAIN, IT'S NOT IT'S NOT A
TICKET CAMPAIGN IS NOT LET'S
HIT EVERYONE IN ZERO TOLERANCE.
THAT'S NOT WHAT IT'S GOING TO
HAPPEN AND AGAINST EACH ONE
OF THE OFFICERS MENTIONED IS
GOING TO MANAGE ONE OF THE
CORRIDORS
.
THEY'LL HAVE THEIR OWN PERSONAL
TIME THAT THEY SPENT IN THE
CORRIDOR.
BUT ALSO IT'S GOING TO THEY'RE
NOT OBVIOUSLY THERE 24/7.
SO IT'S GOING TO REQUIRE A
PATROL OFFICER BRIAN.
SO THEY'RE GOING TO BE TASKED
WITH MANAGEMENT MANAGING THAT
CORRIDOR.
ONE OF THE VALUES THAT WE HAVE
IDENTIFIED FOR OUR DEPARTMENT
IS A LEADERSHIP MINDSET.
THIS WILL GIVE THEM SOME
ABILITY TO DEMONSTRATE THEIR
LEADERSHIP AND HELPING OTHERS
TO SUPPORT THAT THAT GOAL
OF HELPING KEEP THAT CORRIDOR
SAFE AGAIN ALONG THE CORRIDOR
WILL HAVE MONTHLY STATISTICS
OF OFFICER STOPS DURING THE
CORRIDOR VIOLATIONS OBSERVED
WARNING OR INFORMATION STOPS
AND THEN VIOLATIONS ISSUED AS
WELL.
SO THERE'LL BE DATA TO TO BACK
UP WHAT THEIR EFFORTS ARE AND
THEN BE ABLE TO TRACK HOW THEIR
EFFORTS ARE AFFECTING OUR
CRASHES AND AND DRIVING IN THAT
AREA IN THIS FOCUSED EFFORT
GOES HAND IN HAND WITH I'M SURE
YOU'RE ALL FAMILIAR WITH OUR
CITIES DRIVING A QUALITY
ORDINANCE THAT PASSED ABOUT A
YEAR AGO LAST JULY.
WHAT THAT DOES IS IT IDENTIFIES
A VARIETY OF MINOR VIOLATIONS
THAT POLICE ARE NOT GOING TO BE
STOPPING FOR THINGS LIKE TINTED
WINDOWS, TAILLIGHT OUT NO
LICENSE PLATE LIGHT, THINGS
LIKE THAT THAT ARE NOT SAFETY
RELATED.
SO IT PROHIBITS OFFICERS FROM
DOING THAT AND IT'S GOING TO
ALLOW OFFICERS MORE TIME TO
FOCUS ON THESE HAZARDS
VIOLATIONS PARTICULARLY IN THE
CORRIDORS.
SO IT DOES SUPPORT OUR VISION
ZERO GOALS WHICH ARE
ELIMINATING CRASHES ALONG THESE
CORRIDORS AND ANYTHING THAT IS
GOING TO CAUSE SERIOUS INJURY
OR DEATH OR AN ADDITIONAL
COMPONENT OF OUR TRAFFIC SAFETY
PLAN IS AN EDUCATION COMPONENT.
AND I'VE BEEN WORKING WITH LIZ
MARGOLIS WHO'S ON THE
COMMISSION AS WELL AND SHE'S
OUR LIAISON WITH SCHOOL SAFETY
THROUGH THE PUBLIC SCHOOLS AND
WHAT THE PLAN IS GOING TO BE IS
TO HAVE OFFICERS VISIT
CLASSROOMS AND WE'LL HAVE A
PRESENTATION INTERACTIVE
PRESENTATION.
THESE ARE SOME OF THE TOPICS
THAT WE'RE GOING TO BE COVERING
IN THAT PRESENTATION.
IT'LL BE A VOLUNTARY BASIS ON
THE OFFICER'S PART TO GO INTO
THE CLASSROOM TO WILL HAVE A
PRESENTATION FOR FOR ALL
SCHOOLS.
AND AGAIN, WE'RE GOING TO HIT
THE PIONEER HERE ON SKYLINE AND
COMMUNITY HIGH SCHOOL AND TALK
ABOUT TOPICS TEEN DRIVING OR
WHETHER DRIVING DISTRACTED
DRIVING AND THEN PARENTAL
INVOLVEMENT ARE KIND OF THE
FOUR OVERARCHING TOPICS AND
WE'LL DELVE INTO EACH ONE
OF THOSE AND AGAIN WITH AN
INTERACTIVE PRESENTATION TO GET
THE KIDS INVOLVED AND HOPEFULLY
TO START THEM OFF IN THEIR
YOUNG DRIVING YEARS WITH SOME
GOOD SAFETY HABITS AND TO BUILD
ON THOSE AND HELP KEEP KEEP
THEM SAFE AS THEY CONTINUE ON
IN THEIR DRIVING CAREERS
.
NO, AND I'LL JUMP BACK IN AND
AS WE WERE DOING OUR REALLY
SORT OF DEEP LOOK INTO OUR OUR
CRASHES FOR THE LAST FIVE YEARS
OUR KASSI CRASHES SO ARE KILLED
AND OUR LEVEL CRASHES WE REALLY
WANTED TO LOOK AT THESE CRASHES
THROUGH THE LENS OF AND ARE
MOVING TOGETHER TOWARD ZERO AND
REALLY LOOK AT THOSE PROGRAM
AREAS THAT ARE IDENTIFIED IN
THE PLAN AND JUST MAKE NOTE
OF HOW THE PROGRAM AREAS LINED
UP WITH THE DIFFERENT CRASHES
AND WHERE SOME OF THESE PROGRAM
AREAS MAY HAVE INFLUENCED OUR
CRASHES.
SO THIS THIS CHART THIS SLIDE
SHOWS A CHART OF THOSE PROGRAM
AREAS AND OF THE PERCENTAGE
OF CRASHES THAT ARE WOULD BE
IMPACTED BY THAT PROGRAM AREA
AND WHETHER WE HAVE CURRENT
GRANT FUNDING SO OUR OUR FIRST
OUR FIRST AREA IS BEHAVIOR
CHANGE AND THAT IS NOT
SPECIFIED EXACTLY AS WHAT THE
BEHAVIOR CHANGES BUT IT DOES
TIE BACK TO THOSE FIVE KEY
BEHAVIOR CHANGES THAT ARE
IDENTIFIED IN THE PLAN AS BEING
THE MOST RISKY BEHAVIORS AND 85
PERCENT OF THOSE KSEE CRASHES
INVOLVE A BEHAVIOR THAT'S IN
THOSE FIVE BEHAVIORS THAT COULD
BE CHANGED AND WHETHER WE HAVE
OUR CURRENT GRANT FUNDING FOR
THAT WE WE LEFT THAT IS A
QUESTION MARK BECAUSE WE
WEREN'T WE WEREN'T SURE IF
THERE WAS ANYTHING THAT WE IN
ENGINEERING DIDN'T KNOW OF AS
WE WERE PUTTING THE SLIDE
TOGETHER.
AND SO APD MAY HAVE A GRANT
THAT WE WEREN'T AWARE
OF BECAUSE THIS ISN'T ONE
OF ENGINEERING SLIDES AND WE
ALSO LOOKED AT OUR SPEED
MANAGEMENT PROGRAM AND THAT WAS
AT 55 PERCENT AND WE'VE SAID
YES, WE HAVE GRANT FUNDING
AVAILABLE BECAUSE PART
OF SUSANNE'S ASKS FOR A GRANT
IS GOING TO BE COVERING SOME
OF THIS PROGRAM AREA.
WE HAVE SPECIFICALLY IDENTIFIED
ST. RECONFIGURATIONS AND ROAD
DIETZE.
IT'S CALLED OUT IN OUR PLAN 21
PERCENT OF THE CRASHES OCCURRED
ON CORRIDOR'S THAT MAY HAVE MAY
HAVE THE POSSIBILITY OF HAVING
A ROAD DIET AND SO WE'VE SAID
NO, WE DO NOT HAVE ANY GRANT
FUNDING FOR THAT RIGHT NOW WE
DO HAVE FUNDING TO START
ANALYZING THOSE CORRIDORS BUT
WE DON'T HAVE IMPLEMENTATION
FUNDING SET ASIDE AT THIS TIME
.
WE ALSO LOOKED AT ST.
RECONFIGURES AND THAT COULD BE
SOMETHING OTHER.
SO THAT REALLY IS MORE OF LIKE
AN INTERSECTION TREATMENT.
DO WE HAVE LOCATIONS WHERE
MAYBE WE HAVE A RIGHT TURN LANE
THAT WE DON'T ACTUALLY NEED AND
SHOULD WE LOOK AT ANALYZING
THAT LOCATION AND MAYBE MAKING
SOME CHANGES THAT COULD PROVIDE
SLOWER SPEEDS IN THE
INTERSECTION PARTICULARLY
RELATED TO TERMS AND WE HAVE
EIGHT PERCENT ON THAT I'M SORRY
MY EYES ARE SO DRY AND IT'S
REALLY LITTLE TIME HERE AGAIN
THIS IS LIKE YOUR GENERAL CLASS
.
THE NEXT ONES ARE QUICK BUILD
PROGRAM.
THANK YOU.
THE NEXT IS OUR QUICK PROGRAM
AND WE NOTICED THAT 25 PERCENT
OF THOSE THAT FIVE YEARS
OF CRASHES COULD BE IMPACTED BY
THE IMPLEMENTATION OF QUICK
BUILD AND I PARTICULARLY WANT
TO NOTE HERE THAT WE LOOKED WE
LOOKED AT THE PAST FIVE YEARS
SO SOME OF THOSE LOCATIONS WE
HAVE ACTUALLY ALREADY
IMPLEMENTED OUR QUICK VOTE
PROGRAMING AND NOW WE REALLY
WANTED TO LOOK AT THAT LENS,
LOOK BACK THROUGH THAT LENS
OF NOT SAYING WELL, WE'RE NOT
GOING TO NOTICE BECAUSE WE
ALREADY DID IT BECAUSE WE
REALLY WANT TO UNDERSTAND HOW
MANY OF THE CRASHES FALL INTO
THE DIFFERENT PROGRAM AREAS.
>> SO OUR NEXT IS CAPITAL
INVESTMENT.
SO HAVE WE CONSIDERED CAPITAL
INVESTMENT PROJECTS TO BE
LARGER PROJECTS?
SO THOSE ARE GOING TO BE
PROJECTS THAT WOULD BE LARGE
ENOUGH TO GO INTO OUR SIPI OUR
CAPITAL INVESTMENT PROGRAM AND
THOSE ARE GOING TO BE SOME SORT
OF A RECONSTRUCTION A MAJOR
RECONFIGURATION OF AN
INTERSECTION OR A CORRIDOR OR
MAJOR CHANGES TO LIKE SIGNAL
INFRASTRUCTURE AND THAT IS AT
29 PERCENT AND WE SAID YES, WE
DO HAVE CURRENT GRANT FUNDING
FOR THAT AND EXAMPLE OF OUR
CURRENT GRANT FUNDING IS THAT
WE HAVE HIGHWAY SAFETY
IMPROVEMENT FUNDING FOR COUNT
DOWN PEDESTRIAN SIGNAL
REFLEKTOR I SIGNAL BACKPLATE
WHICH BOTH ARE THOSE ARE PROVEN
SAFETY COUNTERMEASURES AND FOR
INSTALLING RF THESE WHICH ARE
THE PEDESTRIAN ACTIVATED
WARNING DEVICES ON MILLER ROAD
FROM NEWPORT TO MAPLE AND THE
LAST ONE THAT IS LISTED HERE IS
EDUCATION ENFORCEMENT CAMPAIGN
.
WE WERE VERY CONSERVATIVE AS A
GROUP OF ENGINEERS AND PLANNERS
WHEN WE WERE NOTING THIS
PARTICULAR AH PROGRAM AREA
BECAUSE WE WANT TO WE DIDN'T
WANT TO OVERPROMISE WHAT WAS
POSSIBLE ESPECIALLY AS WE ARE
NOT PART OF THE ENFORCING
BRANCH OF OUR CITY AND TO
REALLY THINK ABOUT PROGRAMS
THAT COULD REALISTICALLY HAVE
AN IMPACT IF IT'S AN EVENT THAT
MAYBE IS HARDER TO BE ABLE TO
ACTUALLY CATCH IF YOU WERE OUT
AT THE INTERSECTION AND SEEING
IT, WE DIDN'T INCLUDE THOSE
TYPES OF ITEMS SO THOSE ARE AT
EIGHT PERCENT AND ONCE AGAIN WE
LEFT THE QUESTION MARK FOR THE
FUNDING BECAUSE WE WERE NOT
CERTAIN OF WHAT THE STATUS OF A
PD GRANTS ARE MOVING FORWARD.
WE WANTED TO TALK ABOUT NEXT
STEPS BECAUSE AS ALWAYS WE ARE
CONSTANTLY WORKING TOWARDS WHAT
IS THE NEXT THING THAT WE'RE
DOING.
WHAT IS OUR OUR NEXT STEP ON
THIS JOURNEY TOWARDS VISION
ZERO?
SO SOME OF THE THINGS THAT WE
WANTED TO NOTE HERE IS THE
IMPLEMENTATION OF THE
ENFORCEMENT PLAN.
YEAH, LIEUTENANT SCHERBA HAS
DEFINITELY TALKED A LOT ABOUT
WHAT'S GOING ON HERE.
THIS IS HIS WONDERFUL OK ALSO
PROVIDING AN UPDATE ON THAT
SARA MODEL AS THEY'RE MOVING
FORWARD WITH THAT PLAN.
A BIG THING THAT WE'RE GOING TO
BE WORKING ON COLLABORATIVELY
BETWEEN ENGINEERING AND THE
POLICE DEPARTMENT
IS LOOKING AT
EVALUATING OUR METHODOLOGY FOR
TIER ONE AND TIER TWO CORRIDORS
AND INTERSECTION INTERSECTIONS
AND THIS REALLY GOES BACK TO
LOOKING AT THOSE LEVEL CRASHES
AND REALLY BEING ABLE TO
UNDERSTAND WHERE THE MOST
SEVERE CRASHES ARE AND MAKING
SURE THAT WE'RE ADDRESSING THE
MOST SEVERE CRASHES FIRST AND
REALLY PRIORITIZING THOSE
LOCATIONS.
>> SO THIS IS SOMETHING THAT WE
FEEL IS GOING TO BE A CONTINUED
CONVERSATION WITH THE
TRANSPORTATION COMMISSION
BECAUSE THIS IS VERY MUCH A
CHANGE IN POLICY FROM WHAT IS
PRESENTED IN OUR TRANSPORTATION
PLAN AND WE WILL BE CONTINUING
THAT CONVERSATION WITH YOU AS
WE'RE MOVING FORWARD THROUGH
THIS PROCESS.
THE NEXT ITEM THAT'S LISTED
HERE IS TO REVIEW MONTHLY OUR
CRASHES WITH ENGINEERING STAFF
SO ENGINEERS, PLANNERS AND WITH
THE POLICE DEPARTMENT.
SO WE END THIS IN SEPTEMBER AND
WE'RE GOING TO BE EVERY MONTH
LOOKING AT THOSE CRASHES THAT
ARE THOSE MOST SEVERE CRASHES
AND REALLY UNDERSTANDING YOU
KNOW, TAKING THAT FIRST LOOK AT
THEIR WHAT WHAT'S GOING ON WHAT
DO WE NEED TO UNDERSTAND ABOUT
THAT CRASH?
IS THERE ANYTHING THAT WE NEED
TO BE CONCERNED WITH AND MORE
OF A RAPID MOMENT OF WAS THERE
A PIECE OF EQUIPMENT THAT WAS
NOT FUNCTIONAL AND TAKING CARE
OF THOSE THINGS AND THEN ALSO
STARTING TO PLAN FOR THE FUTURE
AND WHAT WE MIGHT WANT TO LOOK
AS FURTHER INTERVENTIONS AND
COUNTERMEASURES FOR THAT
PARTICULAR LOCATION THEN WE ARE
ALSO GOING TO BE TO PRESENT AND
RECEIVE GUIDANCE FROM THE
TRANSPORTATION COMMISSION ON
THOSE PROGRAM AREAS THAT I
MENTIONED PREVIOUSLY
.
>> YOU YOU SHOULD JUST SO THE
TRANSPORTATION COMMISSION YOU
KNOW, WE REALLY WANT TO PROVIDE
AN UPDATE FOR YOU AGAIN ON THIS
PROGRAM AREA.
>> SO THE SLIDE HAS ALL OF THE
PROGRAM AREAS THAT WE'VE
DISCUSSED PREVIOUSLY AND THE
TRANSPORTATION COMMISSION
TOPICS THAT WE'LL BE
COORDINATING WITH PD AND OTHER
APPROPRIATE UNITS, TEAMS ACROSS
THE CITY.
SO WE REALLY WANT TO FOLLOW UP
ON THE POSTEN FORSSMANN PLAN
FROM OUR PARTY FOLKS.
>> AS CYNTHIA NOTED, WE DO HAVE
OUR SPEED MANAGEMENT PROGRAM SO
THERE WILL BE INFORMATION FROM
THE SAFE STREETS FOR ALL RANG
OUT THAT WE RECEIVED AND ALSO
TRAFFIC CALMING TO REPORT OUT
ON THAT AS PART OF OUR STREET
RECONFIGURATION AND ROAD DIET
WE'RE BEGINNING THE MULTI LANE
STREET EVALUATION THAT WAS
DIRECTED FROM COUNCIL, OUR
THREE RECONFIGURATION AND OTHER
ALSO THE MULTILINE EVALUATION
OUR QUICK BUILD PROGRAM WILL BE
REPORTING BACK AS IT RELATES TO
OUR SAFE STREETS FOR ALL GRANT
CAPITAL INVESTMENT.
WE HAVE THE CITY DEVELOPMENT
ALREADY UNDERWAY AND SO THERE
WILL BE A PRESENTATION TOPIC ON
THAT COMING UP SOON.
AGAIN, THE MESSAGING CAMPAIGN
WILL LOOK TO OUR PARTNERS THAT
PARTY TO SEE HOW THAT IS GOING
AND WE'LL ALSO REPORT OUT ON
OUR SLOW SLOW SPEED SAVE LIVES
CAMPAIGN THAT WE'RE KIND
OF CREATING AND ROLLING OUT AT
GREEN FAIR AND THEN OBVIOUSLY
THE EDUCATION AND ENFORCEMENT
AGAIN WILL BE LOOKING TOWARDS
OUR PARTNERS AT PD TO SEE IF
THERE SOME POST ENFORCEMENT
FOLLOW UP, MAYBE SOME RESEARCH
THAT MAY NEED TO BE DONE IN THE
LONG TERM.
AND I BELIEVE THAT CONCLUDES
OUR SLIDE DECK FOR THIS EVENING
.
THANK YOU SO MUCH.
WHAT KIND OF QUESTIONS AND
COMMENTS TO DO PEOPLE HAVE
YOU
JUST READ IS YOUR HAND
YOUR
COMMENTS OR QUESTIONS ANYONE
WILL SAY WAS VERY COMPREHENSIVE
AND THEN YOU KNOW, FAR REACHING
.
THIS IS I THINK A GREAT
PRESENTATION AND I REALLY LIKE
GETTING ACKNOWLEDGMENT THAT
VISION ZERO IS IS YOU TO THINK
AT A SYSTEM LEVEL AND
ACKNOWLEDGE THAT, YOU KNOW,
EVERYBODY HAS HAS A ROLE TO
PLAY IN HELPING TO ADDRESS ALL
OF THE CONCERNS.
SO I REALLY APPRECIATE BEING
HERE AND ALL THE WORK THAT
SUZANNE, CYNTHIA AND MIKE
EVERYBODY PUT INTO THIS AND ALL
OF THE PLANS THAT WE HAVE GOING
FORWARD.
I'M EXCITED TO SEE THOSE SO YES
,
THANKS FOR THE EFFORT ON THIS
.
EVERYONE WHO CONTRIBUTED THIS
IS REALLY GREAT WORK SO THANKS
FOR THANKS FOR PUTTING IT
TOGETHER AND I HAVE A COUPLE
OF COMMENTS AND ONE OF THEM IS
ONE OF THEM IS ABOUT THE IDEA
THAT WE CAN'T YOU SAID WE CAN'T
FIX WITH ENGINEERING LOAN.
RIGHT.
AND I GUESS I I DO AGREE WITH
THAT BUT ENGINEERING IS ONE
OF THE MAIN INPUTS THAT THAT
THAT I SEE THE CITY IS HAVING
IN OUR TRANSPORTATION NETWORK.
>> AND SO I THINK THAT'S WHY WE
WE COUNT ON IT TO DO SO MUCH
RIGHT.
>> THIS ENFORCEMENT IS ANOTHER
EXAMPLE IS SOMETHING THAT
OBVIOUSLY WE COUNT ON OUR
MUNICIPALITY TO DO TOO.
SO I'M LOOKING FORWARD TO
SEEING WHAT WHAT THIS CAUGHT
OUR ENFORCEMENT PROGRAM YIELDS
.
BUT I GUESS IN TERMS
OF EDUCATION I FEEL LIKE I'M
TRYING TO THINK I HOW TO SAY
THIS.
I DON'T THINK OF THE CITY AS
BEING A REAL FORCE IN THE
EDUCATION COMPONENT.
THAT'S NOT TO SAY IT DOESN'T
HAVE SOME ROLE TO PLAY AND I I
I THINK THAT PARTNERING WITH
AAPS IS A GOOD IDEA BUT BUT I
DON'T THINK OF THE CITY AS
BEING HAVING A LARGE EDUCATION
ROLE IN GENERAL LIKE WHEN WE
HAVE HAD EDUCATION PROGRAMS IN
THE PAST LIKE HSBC FOR EXAMPLE
LIKE I FEEL LIKE I PERSONALLY
HEARD A LOT ABOUT IT TO BE SAFE
AND PAID ATTENTION TO A LOT
BECAUSE I DO THINGS LIKE GO TO
CITY COUNCIL MEETINGS AND WATCH
TRANSPORTATION COMMISSION
MEETINGS AND THAT KIND OF THING
BUT I DON'T GET THE FEELING
LIKE OVERALL THE THOUSANDS
PEOPLE THAT WE HAVE IN THE CITY
HEAR THOSE MESSAGES VERY MUCH
SO I WANT PD AND ENGINEERING TO
BE INVOLVED IN THIS EDUCATION
EFFORT BUT I KIND OF FEEL LIKE
WE HAVE AN EDUCATION SYSTEM
THAT AN EDUCATION ORGANIZATION
WITHIN APS WHOSE GOAL IS
EDUCATION AND LIKE I WOULD SORT
OF LIKE TO LEAN ON THEM A
LITTLE BIT MORE TO TAKE THE
LEAD AND I'D LIKE TO SEE A
LITTLE MORE COMMITMENT FROM
THEM TO BE INVOLVED IN
EDUCATION AROUND AROUND
TRANSPORTATION AND I'D LIKE TO
SEE THEM TAKING THE LEAD IN
FIXING THEIR OWN FACILITIES AND
I'D LIKE TO SEE THEM INVOLVED
IN THIS MEETING.
I'VE MADE THAT COMMENT BEFORE
SO THANK YOU FOR YOUR
PARTICIPATION IN EDUCATION.
BUT PLEASE LET'S LET'S TRY AND
GET THE APS MORE INVOLVED.
>> UM, THE OTHER THING I'D LIKE
TO POINT OUT IS THAT UM AND I
GUESS I ALSO HAVE A QUESTION
ABOUT US WE'RE FOCUSING ON HOW
OFTEN WE'RE CD IS CALLED OUT
FOR CRASH INVESTIGATIONS AND
WE'RE TRACKING THAT UM WHEN I
THINK OF THE VISION ZERO GOAL I
THINK OF ALL OF THE A'S AND KS
AND TO ME GETTING THAT DOWN TO
ZERO IS DIVISION ZERO GOAL.
SO I GUESS I'M CURIOUS WHY
WE'RE FOCUSING ON JUST THE THE
CRASH INVESTIGATIONS AND AND
THEN I'M ALSO A LITTLE BIT
CURIOUS ABOUT HOW WE MAKE THE
DISTINCTION BETWEEN WHAT
DESERVES A CRASH INVESTIGATION
AND WHAT DOESN'T.
AND I'D JUST LIKE TO ENCOURAGE
EVERYONE TO KEEP A FOCUS ON KS
AND A'S BECAUSE THAT'S THE
DEFINITION OF ZERO IS GETTING
THOSE TWO ZERO SO THAT I GUESS
THOSE ARE MY COMMENTS AND WE
GET A LITTLE BIT OF FOLLOW UP
ON THE CRASH INVESTIGATION.
UH, QUESTION.
>> YEAH.
THANK YOU.
>> I'M HAPPY TO TAKE THE FIRST
STAB AT THIS AND I THINK WHAT
WHAT WE WANT TO DO BOTH
COLLECTIVELY WE WANT TO
IDENTIFY THE WORST CRASHES AND
THE MOST SEVERE CRASHES AS AND
THOSE LOCATIONS AS THE PLACE TO
START AND WHAT WE FOUND IN OUR
PARTNERSHIP WITH WITH APD AND
WORKING WITH LIEUTENANT URB IS
UNDERSTANDING THAT THERE IS A
LITTLE BIT OF DIFFERENTIATION
WITHIN THOSE ALLOWABLE CRASHES
AND THAT WE WANT TO BE
TARGETING.
WE WANT BOTH SIDES OF BOTH BOTH
OF THESE E COLUMNS ENGINEERING
AND ENFORCEMENT TO BE TARGETING
THOSE SAME AREAS FIRST AND TO
BE WORKING IN CONCERT AS WE ARE
ARE WORKING THROUGH THE AREAS
AND BRINGING DOWN ALL OF THOSE
LEVEL CRASHES.
>> BUT REALLY UNDERSTAND THAT
THE LEVEL CRASHES WHERE THERE
IS AN INVESTIGATION CALL-OUT
WHICH IS THIS HIGHER LEVEL
OF INVESTIGATION BECAUSE OUR
OUR FIRST LEVEL
OF INVESTIGATION DECIDED THIS
IS SERIOUS ENOUGH WE NEED TO DO
A SECONDARY LEVEL
OF INVESTIGATION WHICH I'M SURE
WE CAN TALK ABOUT A LITTLE BIT
MORE AND UNDERSTANDING THAT WE
NEED TO LOOK AT THOSE CRASHES A
LITTLE BIT CLOSER TO THE LEVEL
OF OUR FATALITIES AND HOW DO WE
INCORPORATE THIS THIS NEW
KNOWLEDGE AND UNDERSTANDING
INTO THE DEVELOPMENT OF OUR
FOCUS CORRIDORS SO THAT THE
WORK WE'VE DONE TO REALLY
INCORPORATE SAFETY INTO OUR
COMPREHENSIVE CAPITAL
INVESTMENT PROGRAM DEVELOPMENT
IS TARGETING THE S. ALL OF THE
SAME AREAS SO THAT WE ARE ABLE
TO PARTNER THOSE CAPITAL
INVESTMENTS AND THAT
ENFORCEMENT AT THE SAME TIME.
SO I'M GOING TO TURN IT OVER TO
LIEUTENANT SCHERBA TO FILL IN A
LITTLE BIT MORE ABOUT HOW THOSE
CALL OUTS ARE DETERMINED.
YOUR THANKS ON OUR I TALKED A
LITTLE BIT ABOUT BEFORE BUT OUR
INITIAL CALLS IS TYPICALLY FROM
A PASSER BY OR SOMEONE INVOLVED
IN THE CRASH AND THEN A PATROL
OFFICER GOES TO THE SCENE AND
THAT PATROL OFFICER WILL MAKE A
DETERMINATION BASED ON A
CURSORY ASSESSMENT.
IS THIS A MINOR CRASH?
IS THIS MODERATE CRASH OR IS
THIS STATUS SOMEONE MIGHT DIE
HERE OR THIS IS A SIGNIFICANT
CRASH AND IF THE ANSWER IS THIS
MIGHT RESULT IN A DEATH OR WE
HAVE A VERY SERIOUS INJURY,
THAT'S WHEN THE DECISION WAS
MADE TO LET A SUPERVISOR ON
SCENE AND THE SUPERVISOR WOULD
THEN DECIDE HEY, WE NEED TO
CALL OUT OUR ACCIDENT
INVESTIGATION TEAM IN ORDER TO
LOOK AT THIS MORE CLOSELY AND
WE'LL THEY'LL COME OUT TOOLS
THEY'VE GOT INSTRUMENTATION
THERE'S FOLLOW UP INVOLVED IN
THOSE KINDS OF CRASHES WHERE
THEY'LL OFTEN PULL THE EVENT
DATA RECORDER OUT OF THE CAR TO
FIGURE OUT EXACTLY HOW FAR THE
WHEELS ARE WHEN THE CRASH WHEN
DID BRAKING START WHEN WHAT WAS
THE TOP SPEED, ALL THESE
DIFFERENT THINGS THAT ARE
DETERMINED AND THEY TRY TO
RECONSTRUCT WHAT EXACTLY
HAPPENED TIME IT'S IT'S TO
DETERMINE FAULT.
SOMETIMES IT'S TO JUST FIND OUT
EXACTLY HOW THIS TRANSPIRED
BECAUSE IT'S NOT READILY
OBVIOUS OR APPARENT AND THEY DO
THIS ADVANCED SO IT'S REALLY A
THAT FIRST OFFICER ON SCENE
MAKES THE DETERMINATION YES,
THIS IS THIS IS SERIOUS
SUPERVISOR COMES ON SCENE.
YEAH.
THERE MIGHT BE A FATALITY HERE
OR THIS I'LL SAY IT'S USUALLY
IT'S LIKE THIS PERSON MAY NOT
MAKE IT BUT THEY GOT
TRANSPORTED OR AT THE SCENE TO
SHOW I LOOK BAD.
LET'S CALL THE INVESTIGATION
TEAM.
SO THAT'S HOW THE INITIAL CALL
OUTCOMES FOR THAT FOR THAT
ADVANCED INVESTIGATION DO OCCUR
.
OK, THANKS FOR THAT
CLARIFICATION.
THE QUESTIONS ARE COMMENTS
.
>> I CERTAINLY LOOK FORWARD TO
UPDATES IN THE FUTURE BECAUSE
THERE ARE A LOT OF NEW
INITIATIVES HERE I'M LOOKING
FORWARD TO THE STAFF UPDATES
INCLUDING OUTCOMES FROM THE
MONTHLY MEETING THAT
ENGINEERING STAFF IS GOING TO
HOLD POLICE.
I THINK THAT WILL BE GREAT AND
IT MAY BE AFTER THE TARGETED
CORRIDOR SAFETY PROGRAM GETS
ROLLING.
WE CAN HAVE AN UPDATE FROM FROM
PD ON HOW THAT'S BEEN GOING.
BUT YEAH, THERE'S THERE'S A LOT
OF GREAT STUFF HERE AND AGAIN,
I WANT TO GIVE MY APPRECIATION
TO THE TEAM FOR PULLING THIS
TOGETHER.
>> YEAH.
PETER YES.
I WITH THAT AGAIN AND ALSO
BRETT AND WHAT THAT ONE OF THE
THINGS THAT WE'VE DONE WITH
THIS REPORT IN YEARS PAST I
MEAN GETS IT GETS SHARED A LOT
AND LINKED TO QUITE A BIT THE
ANNUAL REPORT ON RESULTS AND SO
I THINK IT WAS LAST YEAR WHEN
WE STARTED USING THIS NEW
DASHBOARD BUT WE STILL HAD A
PACKAGE THAT HAD SORT OF A A
POINT IN TIME PICTURE WITH ALL
OF THE RELEVANT GRAPHS THAT
WE'VE BEEN TRACKING OVER THE
LAST SEVERAL YEARS.
I WOULD LIKE TO ASK AGAIN TO
HAVE THE PACKAGE PUT SOMEWHERE
ADDED, YOU KNOW, ON ON THE CITY
ON OUR LIST OF DOCUMENTS SO
THAT WE CAN LINK TO IT HAVING A
PDF THAT EVERYBODY'S LOOKING
AT, LOOKING AT THE SAME
DOCUMENT, LOOKING AT THE SAME
NUMBERS TO ME IS VERY VALUABLE
COMPARED WITH TRYING TO
THE
SAME KNOW THE SAME REPORTING
METHODOLOGY THAT I USED TO LOOK
AT SOME DATA.
SO IT'S IT'S GOOD TO HAVE THAT
SINGLE REPORT DOCUMENT PLEASE
IF YOU DON'T MIND MAKING IT FOR
US.
>> IN ADDITION TO THAT DOCUMENT
,I DO REALLY APPRECIATE THE
DATA THAT'S AVAILABLE IN THE
DASHBOARD BEING ABLE TO, YOU
KNOW, DRILL DOWN ON DIFFERENT
YOU KNOW, DIFFERENT REPORTS AND
DIFFERENT ASPECTS OF THE
CRASHES.
>> SO IT'S VERY HELPFUL.
SO UM, I JUST WANT TO SAY THAT
I THINK IT'S A VERY GOOD TOOL
THAT WE'RE DOING A GOOD JOB
WITH HERE IN ANN ARBOR.
THANK YOU.
>> THANKS.
>> I THERE NO OTHER COMMENTS ON
THAT TO THINK AND EVERYBODY FOR
PULLING THIS TOGETHER AND
CALLING IN FROM AS FAR AWAY AS
DENVER TO TO PRESENT APPRECIATE
WHAT YOU GUYS HAVE A GOOD
CONFERENCE OUT THERE.
SO LET'S MOVE ON THEN TO THE
CALL FOR AGENDA ITEMS A MONTHLY
CALL FOR AGENDA ITEMS LOU, DID
YOU WANT TO REVIEW ANYTHING
THAT'S COMING IN THE NEAR
FUTURE AND SAID THIS WAS AROUND
THEY THEY ALREADY PRESENTED THE
THOSE KIND OF TOPICS REGARDING
PROGRAM AREA SO THAT WE WANT TO
BRING BACK TO THE COMMISSION IN
THE IN THE VERY NEAR TERM FOR
OCTOBER .
WE'RE LOOKING AT HAVING THE
DOWNTOWN AREA CIRCULATION'S
DADDY COMING TO THE COMMISSION
TO PRESENT AND ALSO IN THE NEAR
FUTURE ARE DUE TO FOR PROVIDING
AN UPDATE ON SAFE FREIGHT FOR
ALL PROJECTS.
SOME EFFORTS UNDER THAT
UMBRELLA THAT ARE REALLY
KICKING OFF SO THOSE ARE THE
MAIN ITEMS.
THERE ARE SOME OTHER ELEMENTS
FROM THE COMPREHENSIVE
TRANSITION PLAN FOR EXAMPLE,
BICYCLE RELATED IMPROVEMENTS
AND TRANSIT STRATEGIES THERE TO
IDENTIFY STRATEGIES IN THE PLAN
FOR EACH OF THE BICYCLE
CATEGORY AND TRANSIT CATEGORY.
SO THOSE ARE ALSO KIND
OF TOPICS THAT ARE SOME OTHER
BIGGER DISCUSSION OR PROJECTS
FOR EXAMPLE LIKE TRUNK LINE
JURISDICTION TRANSFER THAT
MIGHT BE A LONGER TERM KIND
OF A TOPIC AND THERE ARE SOME
OTHER SIMPLY BY THE SHEER SIZE
OF THE PROJECT IT MIGHT BE
WORTH OF PRESENTING TO THE
COMMISSION THAT HE WAS TWENTY
THREE AND THAT IS PLANNING ON
FREEWAY WORK INCLUDING QUITE A
FEW BRIDGES IN OUR AREA.
SO THAT'S ALSO ANOTHER KIND
OF TOPIC.
SO I AND I WOULD ADD REFERRING
BACK TO THE STUFF UPDATES
REPORT THE STATE STREET BETWEEN
WILLIAM AND S YOU YOU KNOW
THAT'S THE DESIGN WORK IS
ONGOING SO MAYBE IN THE NEAR
FUTURE WOULD BE A GOOD TIME TO
GET THE COMMISSION'S INPUT
BECAUSE THAT'S A REALLY
CRITICAL STRETCH OF ROAD THAT
HASN'T UNTOUCHED IN MANY
DECADES.
THERE'S A LOT OF OPPORTUNITY
THERE.
SO IT MIGHT BE BETTER FOR THE
COMMISSION SOONER RATHER THAN
LATER.
YES, WE'LL DO THAT.
YEAH, IF THERE'S ANY ANY OTHER
INTEREST OR TOPICS WE WILL
CERTAINLY BE HAPPY TO BRING
SOME DETAILS UNTIL THE
COMMISSION ALWAYS EMAIL THEM
QUESTIONS THAT DOWNTOWN AREA
CIRCULATION STUDY UPDATE
PLANNED FOR OCTOBER IS THE
STUDY DONE OR WOULD THIS BE
LIKE AN UPDATE AND THE STUDY
HAS I WOULD GUESS IT'S NOT DONE
YET SO OCTOBER IS GOING TO SEE
ITS SECOND THE SECOND PUBLIC
OUTREACH FOR FOR COMMENTS THE
MAJORITY OF THE MAJOR
COMPONENTS OF THAT STUDY.
THEY ARE THEY ARE TAKING SHAPE
.
SO RIGHT NOW WE ARE
CATEGORIZING ALL THE ELEMENTS
INTO EITHER AN ENGINEERING
CATEGORY OR PLANNING CATEGORY.
SO THAT WAY THAT DISCUSSION AND
STAFF MEMBERS TO BE INVOLVED
ARE MORE STRAIGHTFORWARD TO TO
ENGAGE FOR FOR FINDING ITEMS.
WE ARE WE'RE ENTERTAIN A MORE
DETAILED DISCUSSION DESIGN
CONSIDERATIONS SO THOSE THOSE
WILL BE IN GREATER DETAIL TO
COVER AND FOR PLANNING ITEMS.
WE WANT TO REALLY HAVE A
CONCLUSION AND AGREEMENTS
BETWEEN DIFFERENT PARTIES SO
THE OUTPUT FROM THE PLANNING
EFFORT IS GOING TO PROVIDE
GREAT INPUT INTO THE DESIGN
PROCESS.
SO AND
MAKE JUST INFORMED ME
THAT IT IS A GREAT TOPIC TO
TOTAL BRAIN TO ADDRESS YOUR
COMMENT EARLIER ABOUT STATE
STREET DESIGN TO THE COMMISSION
IN OCTOBER AS WELL RIGHT.
AS ALWAYS, PLEASE EMAIL US WITH
OTHER TOPICS.
>> ALWAYS APPRECIATE ADDING TO
OUR LIST OF AGENDA ITEMS.
>> ALL RIGHT.
SO THE NEXT MEETING WILL BE
HELD WEDNESDAY, OCTOBER 16TH TO
THOSE TWENTY FOUR SEVEN P.M. IT
WILL ALSO BE A VIRTUAL MEETING
SIMILAR TO THIS ONE.
IF THERE ARE NO OBJECTIONS
WE'LL ADJOURN OUR SEPTEMBER
18TH TWO THOUSAND TWENTY TWENTY
FOUR MEETING.
ARE THERE ANY OBJECTIONS SEEING
NONE.
THIS MEETING IS ADJOURNED.
THANK YOU.
GOOD NIGHT.
RECORDING STAR